

Table 1
Preface

One of the current objections to Communism and Socialism altogether, is that the idea is so old, and yet it could never be realized. Schemes of ideal States haunted the thinkers of Ancient Greece; later on, the early Christians joined in communist groups; centuries later, large communist brotherhoods came into existence during the Reform movement. Then, the same ideals were revived during the great English and French Revolutions; and finally, quite lately, in 1848, a revolution, inspired to a great extent with Socialist ideals, took place in France. “And yet, you see,” we are told, “how far away is still the realization of your schemes. Don’t you think that there is some fundamental error in your understanding of human nature and its needs?”

At first sight this objection seems very serious. However, the moment we consider human history more attentively, it loses its strength. We see, first, that hundreds of millions of men have succeeded in maintaining amongst themselves, in their village communities, for many hundreds of years, one of the main elements of Socialism the common ownership of the chief instrument of production, the land, and the apportionment of the same according to the labour capacities of the different families; and we learn that if the communal possession of the land has been destroyed in Western Europe, it was not from within, but from without, by the governments which created a land monopoly in favour of the nobility and the middle classes. We learn, moreover, that the mediæval cities succeeded in maintaining in their midst for several centuries in succession a certain socialized organization of production and trade; that these centuries were periods of a rapid intellectual, industrial, and artistic progress; and that the decay of these communal institutions came mainly from the incapacity of men of combining the village with the city, the peasant with the citizen, so as jointly to oppose the growth of the military states, which destroyed the free cities.

The history of mankind, thus understood, does not offer, then, an argument against Communism. It appears, on the contrary, as a succession of endeavours to realize some sort of communist organization, endeavours which were crowned with a partial success of a certain duration; and all we are authorized to conclude is, that mankind has not yet found the proper form for combining, on communistic principles, agriculture with a suddenly developed industry and a rapidly growing international trade. The latter appears especially as a disturbing element, since it is no longer individuals only, or cities, that enrich themselves by distant commerce and export; but whole nations grow rich at the cost of those nations which lag behind in their industrial development.

These conditions, which began to appear by the end of the eighteenth century, took, however, their full swing in the nineteenth century only, after the Napoleonic wars came to an end. And modern Communism had to take them into account.

It is now known that the French Revolution apart from its political significance, was an attempt made by the French people, in 1793 and 1794, in three different directions more or less akin to Socialism. It was, first, the equalization of fortunes, by means of an income tax and succession duties, both heavily progressive, as also by a direct confiscation of the land in order to subdivide it, and by heavy war taxes levied upon the rich only. The second attempt was to introduce a wide national system of rationally established prices of all commodities, for which the real cost of production and moderate trade profits had to be taken into account. The Convention worked hard at this scheme, and had nearly completed its work, when reaction took the overhand. And the third was a sort of Municipal Communism as regards the consumption of some objects of first necessity, bought by the municipalities, and sold by them at cost price.

It was during this remarkable movement, which has never yet been properly studied, that modern Socialism was born — Fourierism with L’Ange, at Lyons, and authoritarian Communism with Buonarotti, Babeuf, and their comrades. And it was immediately after the Great Revolution that the three great theoretical founders of modern Socialism — Fourier, Saint Simon, and Robert Owen, as well as Godwin (the No-State Socialism) — came forward; while the secret communist societies, originated from those of Buonarotti and Babeuf, gave their stamp to militant Communism for the next fifty years.

To be correct, then, we must say that modern Socialism is not yet a hundred years old, and that, for the first half of these hundred years, two nations only, which stood at the head of the industrial movement, i.e. Britain and France, took part in its elaboration. Both — bleeding at that time from the terrible wounds inflicted upon them by fifteen years of Napoleonic wars, and both enveloped in the great European reaction that had come from the East.

In fact, it was only after the Revolution of July, 1830, in France, and the Reform movement of 1830–32, in England, had shaken off that terrible reaction, that the discussion of Socialism became possible for the next sixteen to eighteen years. And it was during those years that the aspirations of Fourier, Saint Simon, and Robert Owen, worked out by their followers, took a definite shape, and the different schools of Socialism which exist nowadays were defined.

In Britain, Robert Owen and his followers worked out their schemes of communist villages, agricultural and industrial at the same time; immense co-operative associations were started for creating with their dividends more communist colonies; and the Great Consolidated Trades’ Union was founded — the forerunner of the Labour Parties of our days and the International Workingmen’s Association.

In France, the Fourierist Considérant issued his remarkable manifesto, which contains, beautifully developed, all the theoretical considerations upon the growth of Capitalism, which are now described as “Scientific Socialism.” Proudhon worked out his idea of Anarchism, and Mutualism, without State interference. Louis Blanc published his Organization of Labour, which became later on the programme of Lassalle, in Germany. Vidal in France and Lorenz Stein in Germany further developed, in two remarkable works, published in 1846 and 1847 respectively, the theoretical conceptions of Considerant; and finally Vidal, and especially Pecqueur — the latter in a very elaborate work, as also in a series of Reports — developed in detail the system of Collectivism, which he wanted the Assembly of 1848 to vote in the shape of laws.

However, there is one feature, common to all Socialist schemes, of the period, which must be noted. The three great founders of Socialism who wrote at the dawn of the nineteenth century were so entranced by the wide horizons which it opened before them, that they looked upon it as a new revelation, and upon themselves as upon the founders of a new religion. Socialism had to be a religion, and they had to regulate its march, as the heads of a new church. Besides, writing during the period of reaction which had followed the French Revolution, and seeing more its failures than its successes, they did not trust the masses, and they did not appeal to them for bringing about the changes which they thought necessary. They put their faith, on the contrary, in some great ruler. He would understand the new revelation; he would be convinced of its desirability by the successful experiments of their phalansteries, or associations; and he would peacefully accomplish by the means of his own authority the revolution which would bring well-being and happiness to mankind. A military genius, Napoleon, had just been ruling Europe.... Why should not a social genius come forward and carry Europe with him and transfer the new Gospel into life?... That faith was rooted very deep, and it stood for a long time in the way of Socialism; its traces are ever seen amongst us, down to the present day.

It was only during the years 1840–48, when the approach of the Revolution was felt everywhere, and the proletarians were beginning to plant the banner of Socialism on the barricades, that faith in the people began to enter once more the hearts of the social schemers: faith, on the one side, in Republican Democracy, and on the other side in free association and the organizing powers of the working men themselves.

But then came the Revolution of February, 1848, the middle-class Republic, and — with it, broken hopes. Four months only after the proclamation of the Republic, the June insurrection of the Paris proletarians broke out, and it was crushed in blood. The wholesale shooting of the working-men, the mass deportations to New Guinea, and finally the Napoleonian coup d’état followed. The Socialists were prosecuted with fury, and the weeding out was so terrible and so thorough that for the next twelve or fifteen years the very traces of Socialism disappeared; its literature vanished so completely that even names, once so familiar before 1848, were entirely forgotten; ideas which were then current — the stock ideas of the Socialists before 1848 — were wiped out of the memories and were taken, later on, by the present generation, for new discoveries.

However, when a new revival came, about 1866, when Communism and Collectivism once more came forward, the conception as to the means of their realization had undergone a deep change. The old faith in Political Democracy was gone, and the first principles upon which the Paris working men agreed with the British trade-unionists and Owenites, when they met in 1866 at London, was that “the emancipation of the working-men must be accomplished by the working-men themselves.” Upon another point they also fell in. It was that the labour unions themselves would have to get hold of the instruments of production, and organize production themselves. The French idea of the Fourierist and Mutualist “Association” thus joined hands with Robert Owen’s idea of “The Great Consolidated Trades’ Union,” which was extended now, so as to become an International Working-men’s Association.

Again this new revival of Socialism lasted but a few years. Soon came the war of 1870–1871, the uprising of the Paris Commune — and again: the free development of Socialism was rendered impossible in France. But while Germany accepted now from the hands of its German teachers, Marx and Engels, the Socialism of the French “forty-eighters” — the Socialism of Considérant and Louis Blanc, and the Collectivism of Pecqueur, — France made a further step forward.

In March, 1871, Paris had proclaimed that hence forward it would not wait for the retardatory portions of France, and intended to start within its Commune its own social development.

The movement was too short-lived to give any positive result. It remained communalist only. But the working-classes of the old International saw at once its historical significance. They understood that the free commune would be henceforth the medium in which the ideas of modern Socialism may come to realization. The free agro-industrial communes, of which so much was spoken in 1848, need not be small phalansteries, or small communities of 2000 persons. They must be vast agglomerations, like Paris, or, still better, small territories. These communes would federate, even irrespectively of national frontiers (like the Cinque Ports, or the Hansa); and large labour associations might come into existence for the inter-communal service of the railways, the docks, and so on. Such were the ideas which began vaguely to circulate after 1871 amongst the thinking working-men, especially in the Latin countries. In some such organization, the details of which life itself would settle, the labour circles of these countries saw the medium through which Socialist forms of life could find a much easier realization than through the Collectivist system of the State Socialists.

These are the ideas to which I have endeavoured to give a more or less definite expression in this book.

Looking back now at the years that have passed since this book was written, I can say in full conscience that its leading ideas must have been correct. The State Socialism of the collectivist system has certainly made some progress. State railways, State banking, and State trade in spirits have been introduced here and there. But every step made in this direction, even though it resulted in the cheapening of a given commodity, was found to be a new obstacle in the struggle of the working-men for their emancipation. So that we find now amongst the working-men, especially in England, the idea that even the working of such a vast national property as a railway-net could be much better handled by a Federated Union of railway employés, than by a State organization.

On the other side, we see that countless attempts have been made all over Europe and America, the leading idea of which is, on the one side, to get into the hands of the working-men themselves wide branches of production, and, on the other side, always to widen in the cities the circles of the functions which the city performs in the interest of its inhabitants. Trade-unionism, with a growing tendency towards organizing the different trades internationally, and of being not only an instrument for improving the conditions of labour, but also to become an organization which might, at a given moment, take into its hands the management of production; Co-operativism, both for production and for distribution, both in industry and agriculture, and attempts at combining both sorts of co-operation in experimental colonies; and finally, the immensely varied field of the so-called Municipal Socialism — these are the three directions in which the greatest amount of creative power has been developed lately.

Of course, none of these may, in any degree, be taken as a substitute for Communism, or even for Socialism, both of which imply the common possession of the instruments of production. But we certainly must look at all the just-mentioned attempts as upon experiments — like those which Owen, Fourier, and Saint Simon tried in their colonies — experiments which prepare human thought to conceive some of the practical forms in which a communist society might find its expression. The synthesis of all these partial experiments will have to be made some day by the constructive genius of some one of the civilized nations, and it will be done. But samples of the bricks out of which the great synthetic building will have to be built, and even samples of some of its rooms, are being prepared by the immense effort of the constructive genius of man.

    Bromley, Kent.

    October, 1906.

Chapter 1: Our Riches
I

The human race has travelled far, since those bygone ages when men used to fashion their rude implements of flint, and lived on the precarious spoils of the chase, leaving to their children for their only heritage a shelter beneath the rocks, some poor utensils — and Nature, vast, ununderstood, and terrific, with whom they had to fight for their wretched existence.

During the agitated times which have elapsed since, and which have lasted for many thousand years, mankind has nevertheless amassed untold treasures. It has cleared the land, dried the marshes, pierced the forests, made roads; it has been building, inventing, observing, reasoning; it has created a complex machinery, wrested her secrets from Nature, and finally it has made a servant of steam. And the result is, that now the child of the civilized man finds ready, at its birth, to his hand an immense capital accumulated by those who have gone before him. And this capital enables him to acquire, merely by his own labour, combined with the labour of others, riches surpassing the dreams of the Orient, expressed in the fairy tales of the Thousand and One Nights.

The soil is cleared to a great extent, fit for the reception of the best seeds, ready to make a rich return for the skill and labour spent upon it — a return more than sufficient for all the wants of humanity. The methods of cultivation are known.

On the wide prairies of America each hundred men, with the aid of powerful machinery, can produce in a few months enough wheat to maintain ten thousand people for a whole year. And where man wishes to double his produce, to treble it, to multiply it a hundred-fold, he makes the soil, gives to each plant the requisite care, and thus obtains enormous returns. While the hunter of old had to scour fifty or sixty square miles to find food for his family, the civilized man supports his household, with far less pains, and far more certainty, on a thousandth part of that space. Climate is no longer an obstacle. When the sun fails, man replaces it by artificial heat; and we see the coming of a time when artificial light also will be used to stimulate vegetation. Meanwhile, by the use of glass and hot water pipes, man renders a given space ten and fifty times more productive than it was in its natural state.

The prodigies accomplished in industry are still more striking. With the co-operation of those intelligent beings, modern machines — themselves the fruit of three or four generations of inventors, mostly unknown — a hundred men manufacture now the stuff to clothe ten thousand persons for a period of two years. In well-managed coal mines the labour of a hundred miners furnishes each year enough fuel to warm ten thousand families under an inclement sky. And we have lately witnessed twice the spectacle of a wonderful city springing up in a few months at Paris,[1] without interrupting in the slightest degree the regular work of the French nation.

And if in manufactures as in agriculture, and as indeed through our whole social system, the labour, the discoveries, and the inventions of our ancestors profit chiefly the few, it is none the less certain that mankind in general, aided by the creatures of steel and iron which it already possesses, could already procure an existence of wealth and ease for every one of its members.

Truly, we are rich, far richer than we think; rich in what we already possess, richer still in the possibilities of production of our actual mechanical outfit; richest of all in what we might win from our soil, from our manufactures, from our science, from our technical knowledge, were they but applied to bringing about the well-being of all.
II

We, in civilized societies, are rich. Why then are the many poor? Why this painful drudgery for the masses? Why, even to the best paid workman, this uncertainty for the morrow, in the midst of all the wealth inherited from the past, and in spite of the powerful means of production, which could ensure comfort to all in return for a few hours of daily toil?

The Socialists have said it and repeated it unwearyingly. Daily they reiterate it, demonstrating it by arguments taken from all the sciences. It is because all that is necessary for production — the land, the mines, the highways, machinery, food, shelter, education, knowledge — all have been seized by the few in the course of that long story of robbery, enforced migration and wars, of ignorance and oppression, which has been the life of the human race before it had learned to subdue the forces of Nature. It is because, taking advantage of alleged rights acquired in the past, these few appropriate to-day two-thirds of the products of human labour, and then squander them in the most stupid and shameful way. It is because, having reduced the masses to a point at which they have not the means of subsistence for a month, or even for a week in advance, the few only allow the many to work on condition of themselves receiving the lion’s share. It is because these few prevent the remainder of men from producing the things they need, and force them to produce, not the necessaries of life for all, but whatever offers the greatest profits to the monopolists. In this is the substance of all Socialism.

Take, indeed, a civilized country. The forests which once covered it have been cleared, the marshes drained, the climate improved. It has been made habitable. The soil, which bore formerly only a coarse vegetation, is covered to-day with rich harvests. The rock-walls in the valleys are laid out in terraces and covered with vines bearing golden fruit. The wild plants, which yielded nought but acrid berries, or uneatable roots, have been transformed by generations of culture into succulent vegetables, or trees covered with delicious fruits. Thousands of highways and railroads furrow the earth, and pierce the mountains. The shriek of the engine is heard in the wild gorges of the Alps, the Caucasus, and the Himalayas. The rivers have been made navigable; the coasts, carefully surveyed, are easy of access; artificial harbours, laboriously dug out and protected against the fury of the sea, afford shelter to the ships. Deep shafts have been sunk in the rocks; labyrinths of underground galleries have been dug out where coal may be raised or minerals extracted. At the crossings of the highways great cities have sprung up, and within their borders all the treasures of industry, science, and art have been accumulated.

Whole generations, that lived and died in misery, oppressed and ill-treated by their masters, and worn out by toil, have handed on this immense inheritance to our century.

For thousands of years millions of men have laboured to clear the forests, to drain the marshes, and to open up highways by land and water. Every rood of soil we cultivate in Europe has been watered by the sweat of several races of men. Every acre has its story of enforced labour, of intolerable toil, of the people’s sufferings. Every mile of railway, every yard of tunnel, has received its share of human blood.

The shafts of the mine still bear on their rocky walls the marks made by the pick of the workman who toiled to excavate them. The space between each prop in the underground galleries might be marked as a miner’s grave; and who can tell what each of these graves has cost, in tears, in privations, in unspeakable wretchedness to the family who depended on the scanty wage of the worker cut off in his prime by fire-damp, rock-fall, or flood?

The cities, bound together by railroads and waterways, are organisms which have lived through centuries. Dig beneath them and you find, one above another, the foundations of streets, of houses, of theatres, of public buildings. Search into their history and you will see how the civilization of the town, its industry, its special characteristics, have slowly grown and ripened through the co-operation of generations of its inhabitants before it could become what it is to-day. And even to-day; the value of each dwelling, factory, and warehouse, which has been created by the accumulated labour of the millions of workers, now dead and buried, is only maintained by the very presence and labour of legions of the men who now inhabit that special corner of the globe. Each of the atoms composing what we call the Wealth of Nations owes its value to the fact that it is a part of the great whole. What would a London dockyard or a great Paris warehouse be if they were not situated in these great centres of international commerce? What would become of our mines, our factories, our workshops, and our railways, without the immense quantities of merchandise transported every day by sea and land?

Millions of human beings have laboured to create this civilization on which we pride ourselves to-day. Other millions, scattered through the globe, labour to maintain it. Without them nothing would be left in fifty years but ruins.

There is not even a thought, or an invention, which is not common property, born of the past and the present. Thousands of inventors, known and unknown, who have died in poverty, have co-operated in the invention of each of these machines which embody the genius of man.

Thousands of writers, of poets, of scholars, have laboured to increase knowledge, to dissipate error, and to create that atmosphere of scientific thought, without which the marvels of our century could never have appeared. And these thousands of philosophers, of poets, of scholars, of inventors, have themselves been supported by the labour of past centuries. They have been upheld and nourished through life, both physically and mentally, by legions of workers and craftsmen of all sorts. They have drawn their motive force from the environment.

The genius of a Séguin, a Mayer, a Grove, has certainly done more to launch industry in new directions than all the capitalists in the world. But men of genius are themselves the children of industry as well as of science. Not until thousands of steam-engines had been working for years before all eyes, constantly transforming heat into dynamic force, and this force into sound, light, and electricity, could the insight of genius proclaim the mechanical origin and the unity of the physical forces. And if we, children of the nineteenth century, have at last grasped this idea, if we know now how to apply it, it is again because daily experience has prepared the way. The thinkers of the eighteenth century saw and declared it, but the idea remained undeveloped, because the eighteenth century had not grown up like ours, side by side with the steam-engine. Imagine the decades that might have passed while we remained in ignorance of this law, which has revolutionized modern industry, had Watt not found at Soho skilled workmen to embody his ideas in metal, bringing all the parts of his engine to perfection, so that steam, pent in a complete mechanism, and rendered more docile than a horse, more manageable than water, became at last the very soul of modern industry.

Every machine has had the same history — a long record of sleepless nights and of poverty, of disillusions and of joys, of partial improvements discovered by several generations of nameless workers, who have added to the original invention these little nothings, without which the most fertile idea would remain fruitless. More than that: every new invention is a synthesis, the resultant of innumerable inventions which have preceded it in the vast field of mechanics and industry.

Science and industry, knowledge and application, discovery and practical realization leading to new discoveries, cunning of brain and of hand, toil of mind and muscle — all work together. Each discovery, each advance, each increase in the sum of human riches, owes its being to the physical and mental travail of the past and the present.

By what right then can any one whatever appropriate the least morsel of this immense whole and say — This is mine, not yours?
III

It has come about, however, in the course of the ages traversed by the human race, that all that enables man to produce, and to increase his power of production, has been seized by the few. Sometime, perhaps, we will relate how this came to pass. For the present let it suffice to state the fact and analyse its consequences.

To-day the soil, which actually owes its value to the needs of an ever-increasing population, belongs to a minority who prevent the people from cultivating it — or do not allow them to cultivate it according to modern methods.

The mines, though they represent the labour of several generations, and derive their sole value from the requirements of the industry of a nation and the clensity of the population — the mines also belong to the few; and these few restrict the output of coal, or prevent it entirely, if they find more profitable investments for their capital. Machinery, too, has become the exclusive property of the few, and even when a machine incontestably represents the improvements added to the original rough invention by three or four generations of workers, it none the less belongs to a few owners. And if the descendants of the very inventor who constructed the first machine for lace-making, a century ago, were to present themselves to-day in a lace factory at Bâle or Nottingham, and demand their rights, they would be told: “Hands off! this machine is not yours,” and they would be shot down if they attempted to take possession of it.

The railways, which would be useless as so much old iron without the teeming population of Europe, its industry, its commerce, and its marts, belong to a few shareholders, ignorant perhaps of the whereabouts of the lines of rails which yield them revenues greater than those of medieval kings. And if the children of those who perished by thousands while excavating the railway cuttings and tunnels were to assemble one day, crowding in their rags and hunger, to demand bread from the shareholders, they would be met with bayonets and grape-shot, to disperse them and safeguard “vested interests.”

In virtue of this monstrous system, the son of the worker, on entering life, finds no field which he may till, no machine which he may tend, no mine in which he may dig, without accepting to leave a great part of what he will produce to a master. He must sell his labour for a scant and uncertain wage. His father and his grandfather have toiled to drain this field, to build this mill, to perfect this machine. They gave to the work the full measure of their strength, and what more could they give? But their heir comes into the world poorer than the lowest savage. If he obtains leave to till the fields, it is on condition of surrendering a quarter of the produce to his master, and another quarter to the government and the middlemen. And this tax, levied upon him by the State, the capitalist, the lord of the manor, and the middleman, is always increasing; it rarely leaves him the power to improve his system of culture. If he turns to industry, he is allowed to work — though not always even that — only on condition that he yield a half or two-thirds of the product to him whom the land recognizes as the owner of the machine.

We cry shame on the feudal baron who forbade the peasant to turn a clod of earth unless he surrendered to his lord a fourth of his crop. We call those the barbarous times. But if the forms have changed, the relations have remained the same, and the worker is forced, under the name of free contract, to accept feudal obligations. For, turn where he will, he can find no better conditions. Everything has become private property, and he must accept, or die of hunger.

The result of this state of things is that all our production tends in a wrong direction. Enterprise takes no thought for the needs of the community. Its only aim is to increase the gains of the speculator. Hence the constant fluctuations of trade, the periodical industrial crises, each of which throws scores of thousands of workers on the streets.

The working people cannot purchase with their wages the wealth which they have produced, and industry seeks foreign markets among the monied classes of other nations. In the East, in Africa, everywhere, in Egypt, Tonkin or the Congo, the European is thus bound to promote the growth of serfdom. And so he does. But soon he finds everywhere similar competitors. All the nations evolve on the same lines, and wars, perpetual wars, break out for the right of precedence in the market. Wars for the possession of the East, wars for the empire of the sea, wars to impose duties on imports and to dictate conditions to neighbouring states; wars against those “blacks” who revolt! The roar of the cannon never ceases in the world, whole races are massacred, the states of Europe spend a third of their budgets in armaments; and we know how heavily these taxes fall on the workers.

Education still remains the privilege of a small minority, for it is idle to talk of education when the workman’s child is forced, at the age of thirteen, to go down into the mine or to help his father on the farm. It is idle to talk of studies to the worker, who comes home in the evening crushed by excessive toil with its brutalizing atmosphere. Society is thus bound to remain divided into two hostile camps, and in such conditions freedom is a vain word. The Radical begins by demanding a greater extension of political rights, but he soon sees that the breath of liberty leads to the uplifting of the proletariat, and then he turns round, changes his opinions, and reverts to repressive legislation and government by the sword.

A vast array of courts, judges, executioners, policemen, and gaolers is needed to uphold these privileges; and this array gives rise in its turn to a whole system of espionage, of false witness, of spies, of threats and corruption.

The system under which we live checks in its turn the growth of the social sentiment. We all know that without uprightness, without self-respect, without sympathy and mutual aid, human kind must perish, as perish the few races of animals living by rapine, or the slave-keeping ants. But such ideas are not to the taste of the ruling classes, and they have elaborated a whole system of pseudo-science to teach the contrary.

Fine sermons have been preached on the text that those who have should share with those who have not, but he who would act out this principle is speedily informed that these beautiful sentiments are all very well in poetry, but not in practice. “To lie is to degrade and besmirch oneself,” we say, and yet all civilized life becomes one huge lie. We accustom ourselves and our children to hypocrisy, to the practice of a double-faced morality. And since the brain is ill at ease among lies, we cheat ourselves with sophistry. Hypocrisy and sophistry become the second nature of the civilized man.

But a society cannot live thus; it must return to truth or cease to exist.

Thus the consequences which spring from the original act of monopoly spread through the whole of social life. Under pain of death, human societies are forced to return to first principles: the means of production being the collective work of humanity, the product should be the collective property of the race. Individual appropriation is neither just nor serviceable. All belongs to all. All things are for all men, since all men have need of them, since all men have worked in the measure of their strength to produce them, and since it is not possible to evaluate every one’s part in the production of the world’s wealth.

All things are for all. Here is an immense stock of tools and implements; here are all those iron slaves which we call machines, which saw and plane, spin and weave for us, unmaking and remaking, working up raw matter to produce the marvels of our time. But nobody has the right to seize a single one of these machines and say, “This is mine; if you want to use it you must pay me a tax on each of your products,” any more than the feudal lord of medieval times had the right to say to the peasant, “This hill, this meadow belong to me, and you must pay me a tax on every sheaf of corn you reap, on every rick you build.”

All is for all! If the man and the woman bear their fair share of work, they have a right to their fair share of all that is produced by all, and that share is enough to secure them well-being. No more of such vague formulas as “The Right to work,” or “To each the whole result of his labour.” What we proclaim is THE RIGHT TO WELL-BEING: WELL-BEING FOR ALL!
Chapter 2: Well-Being for All
I

Well-being for all is not a dream. It is possible, realizable, owing to all that our ancestors have done to increase our powers of production.

We know, indeed, that the producers, although they constitute hardly one-third of the inhabitants of civilized countries, even now produce such quantities of goods that a certain degree of comfort could be brought to every hearth. We know further that if all those who squander to-day the fruits of others’ toil were forced to employ their leisure in useful work, our wealth would increase in proportion to the number of producers, and more. Finally, we know that contrary to the theory enunciated by Malthus — that Oracle of middle-class Economics — the productive powers of the human race increase at a much more rapid ratio than its powers of reproduction. The more thickly men are crowded on the soil, the more rapid is the growth of their wealth-creating power.

Thus, although the population of England has only increased from 1844 to 1890 by 62 per cent, its production has grown, to say the least, at double that rate — to wit, by 130 per cent. In France, where the population has grown more slowly, the increase in production is nevertheless very rapid. Notwithstanding the crises through which agriculture is frequently passing, notwithstanding State interference, the blood-tax (conscription), and speculative commerce and finance, the production of wheat in France has increased fourfold, and industrial production more than tenfold, in the course of the last eighty years. In the United States the progress is still more striking. In spite of immigration, or rather precisely because of the influx of surplus European labour, the United States have multiplied their wealth tenfold.

However, these figures give yet a very faint idea of what our wealth might become under better conditions. For alongside of the rapid development of our wealth-producing powers we have an overwhelming increase in the ranks of the idlers and middlemen. Instead of capital gradually concentrating itself in a few hands, so that it would only be necessary for the community to dispossess a few millionaires and enter upon its lawful heritage — instead of this Socialist forecast proving true, the exact reverse is coming to pass: the swarm of parasites is ever increasing.

In France there are not ten actual producers to every thirty inhabitants. The whole agricultural wealth of the country is the work of less than seven millions of men, and in the two great industries, mining and the textile trade, you will find that the workers number less than two and one-half millions. But the exploiters of labour, how many are they? — In England (exclusive of Scotland and Ireland), only one million workers — men, women, and children — are employed in all the textile trades, rather more than half a million work the mines, rather less than half a million till the ground, and the statisticians have to exaggerate all the figures in order to establish a maximum of eight million producers to twenty-six million inhabitants. Strictly speaking the creators of the goods exported from Britain to all the ends of the earth comprise only from six to seven million workers. And what is the sum of the shareholders and middlemen who levy the first fruits of labour from far and near, and heap up unearned gains by thrusting themselves between the producer and the consumer, paying the former not a fifth, nay, not a twentieth, of the price they exact from the latter?

Nor is this all. Those who withhold capital constantly reduce the output by restraining production. We need not speak of the cartloads of oysters thrown into the sea to prevent a dainty, hitherto reserved for the rich, from becoming a food for the people. We need not speak of the thousand and one luxuries — stuffs, foods, etc. etc. — treated after the same fashion as the oysters. It is enough to remember the way in which the production of the most necessary things is limited. Legions of miners are ready and willing to dig out coal every day, and send it to those who are shivering with cold; but too often a third, or even two-thirds, of their number are forbidden to work more than three days a week, because, forsooth, the price of coal must be kept up? Thousands of weavers are forbidden to work the looms, though their wives and children go in rags, and though three-quarters of the population of Europe have no clothing worthy the name.

Hundreds of blast-furnaces, thousands of factories periodically stand idle, others only work half-time — and in every civilized nation there is a permanent population of about two million individuals who ask only for work, but to whom work is denied.

How gladly would these millions of men set to work to reclaim waste lands, or to transform illcultivated land into fertile fields, rich in harvests! A year of well-directed toil would suffice to multiply fivefold the produce of dry lands in the south of France which now yield only about eight bushels of wheat per acre. But these men, who would be happy to become hardy pioneers in so many branches of wealth-producing activity, must stay their hands because the owners of the soil, the mines, and the factories prefer to invest their capital — stolen in the first place from the community — in Turkish or Egyptian bonds, or in Patagonian gold mines, and so make Egyptian fellahs, Italian exiles, and Chinese coolies their wage-slaves.

So much for the direct and deliberate limitation of production; but there is also a limitation indirect and not of set purpose, which consists in spending human toil on objects absolutely useless, or destined only to satisfy the dull vanity of the rich.

It is impossible to reckon in figures the extent to which wealth is restricted indirectly, the extent to which energy is squandered, that might have served to produce, and above all to prepare the machinery necessary to production. It is enough to cite the immense sums spent by Europe in armaments for the sole purpose of acquiring control of the markets, and so forcing her own commercial standards on neighbouring territories and making exploitation easier at home; the millions paid every year to officials of all sorts, whose function it is to maintain the rights of minorities — the right, that is, of a few rich men — to manipulate the economic activities of the nation; the millions spent on judges, prisons, policemen, and all the paraphernalia of so-called justice — spent to no purpose, because we know that every alleviation, however slight, of the wretchedness of our great cities is followed by a very considerable diminution of crime; lastly, the millions spent on propagating pernicious doctrines by means of the press, and news “cooked” in the interest of this or that party, of this politician or of that company of exploiters.

But over and above this we must take into account all the labour that goes to sheer waste, in keeping up the stables, the kennels, and the retinue of the rich, for instance; in pandering to the caprices of society and to the depraved tastes of the fashionable mob; in forcing the consumer on the one hand to buy what he does not need, or foisting an inferior article upon him by means of puffery, and in producing on the other hand wares which are absolutely injurious, but profitable to the manufacturer. What is squandered in this manner would be enough to double our real wealth, or so to plenish our mills and factories with machinery that they would soon flood the shops with all that is now lacking to two-thirds of the nation. Under our present system a full quarter of the producers in every nation are forced to be idle for three or four months in the year, and the labour of another quarter, if not of the half, has no better results than the amusement of the rich or the exploitation of the public.

Thus, if we consider on the one hand the rapidity with which civilized nations augment their powers of production, and on the other hand the limits set to that production, be it directly or indirectly, by existing conditions, one cannot but conclude that an economic system a trifle more enlightened would permit them to heap up in a few years so many useful products that they would be constrained to cry — “Enough! We have enough coal and bread and raiment ! Let us rest and consider how best to use our powers, how best to employ our leisure.”

No, plenty for all is not a dream — though it was a dream indeed in those old days when man, for all his pains, could hardly win a bushel of wheat from an acre of land, and had to fashion by hand all the implements he used in agriculture and industry. Now it is no longer a dream, because man has invented a motor which, with a little iron and a few pounds of coal, gives him the mastery of a creature strong and docile as a horse, and capable of setting the most complicated machinery in motion.

But, if plenty for all is to become a reality, this immense capital — cities, houses, pastures, arable lands, factories, highways, education — must cease to be regarded as private property, for the monopolist to dispose of at his pleasure.

This rich endowment, painfully won, builded, fashioned, or invented by our ancestors, must become common property, so that the collective interests of men may gain from it the greatest good for all.

There must be EXPROPRIATION. The well-being of all — the end; expropriation — the means.
II

Expropriation, such then is the problem which History has put before the men of the twentieth century: the return to Communism in all that ministers to the well-being of man.

But this problem cannot be solved by means of legislation. No one imagines that. The poor, no less than the rich, understand that neither the existing Governments, nor any which might arise out of possible political changes, would be capable of finding a solution. We feel the necessity of a social revolution; rich and poor alike recognize that this revolution is imminent, that it may break out in a very few years.

A great change in thought has been accomplished during the last half of the nineteenth century; but suppressed, as it was, by the propertied classes, and denied its natural development, this new spirit must break now its bonds by violence and realize itself in a revolution.

Whence comes the revolution, and how will it announce its coming? None can answer these questions. The future is hidden. But those who watch and think do not misinterpret the signs: workers and exploiters, Revolutionists and Conservatives, thinkers and men of action, all feel that the revolution is at our doors.

Well! What are we to do when the thunderbolt has fallen?

We have all been studying the dramatic side of revolution so much, and the practical work of revolution so little, that we are apt to see only the stage effects, so to speak, of these great movements; the fight of the first days; the barricades. But this fight, this first skirmish, is soon ended, and it is only after the overthrow of the old constitution that the real work of revolution can be said to begin.

Effete and powerless, attacked on all sides, the old rulers are soon swept away by the breath of insurrection. In a few days the middle-class monarchy of 1848 was no more, and while Louis Philippe was making good his escape in a cab, Paris had already forgotten her “citizen king.” The government of Thiers disappeared, on the 18th of March, I871, in a few hours, leaving Paris mistress of her destinies. Yet 1848 and 1871 were only insurrections. Before a popular revolution the masters of “the old order” disappear with a surprising rapidity. Its upholders fly the country, to plot in safety elsewhere and to devise measures for their return.

The former Government having disappeared, the army, hesitating before the tide of popular opinion, no longer obeys its commanders, who have also prudently decamped. The troops stand by without interfering, or join the rebels. The police, standing at ease, are uncertain whether to belabour the crowd or to cry: “Long live the Commune!” while some retire to their quarters “to await the pleasure of the new Government.” Wealthy citizens pack their trunks and betake themselves to places of safety. The people remain. This is how a revolution is ushered in. In several large towns the Commune is proclaimed. In the streets wander thousands of men, who in the evening crowd into improvised clubs asking: “What shall we do?” and ardently discuss public affairs, in which all take an interest; those who yesterday were most indifferent are perhaps the most zealous. Everywhere there is plenty of goodwill and a keen desire to make victory certain. It is a time of supreme devotion. The people are ready to go forward.

All this is splendid, sublime; but still, it is not a revolution. Nay, it is only now that-the work of the revolutionist begins.

Doubtless the thirst for vengeance will be satisfied. The Watrins and the Thomases will pay the penalty of their unpopularity, but that is only an incident of the struggle and not a revolution.

Socialist politicians, radicals, neglected geniuses of journalism, stump orators, middle-class citizens, and workmen hurry to the Town Hall to the Government offices, and take possession of the vacant seats. Some rejoice their hearts with galloon, admire themselves in ministerial mirrors, and study to give orders with an air of importance appropriate to their new position. They must have a red sash, an embroidered cap, and magisterial gestures to impress their comrades of the office or the workshop! Others bury themselves in official papers, trying, with the best of wills, to make head or tail of them. They indite laws and issue high-flown worded decrees that nobody takes the trouble to carry out — because the revolution has come. To give themselves an authority which is lacking they seek the sanction of old forms of Government. They take the names of “Provisional Government,” “Committee of Public Safety,” “Mayor,” “Governor of the Town Hall,” “Commissioner of Public Weal,” and what not. Elected or acclaimed, they assemble in Boards or in Communal Councils. These bodies include men of ten or twenty different schools, which, if not exactly “private chapels,” are at least so many sects which represent as many ways of regarding the scope, the bearing, and the goal of the revolution. Possibilists, Collectivists, Radicals, Jacobins, Blanquists, are thrust together, and waste time in wordy warfare. Honest men come into contact with ambitious ones, whose only dream is power and who spurn the crowd whence they sprung. Coming together with diametrically opposed views, they are forced to form arbitrary alliances in order to create majorities that can but last a day. Wrangling, calling each other reactionaries, authoritarians, and rascals, incapable of coming to an understanding on any serious measure, dragged into discussions about trifles, producing nothing better than bombastic proclamations, yet taking themselves seriously, unwitting that the real strength of the movement is in the streets.

All this may please those who like the theatre, but it is not revolution. Nothing yet has been accomplished Meanwhile the people suffer. The factories are idle, the workshops closed; industry is at a standstill. The worker does not even earn the meagre wage which was his before. Food goes up in price. With that heroic devotion which has always characterized them, and which in great crises reaches the sublime, the people wait patiently. “We place these three months of want at the service of the Republic,” they said in 1848, while “their representatives” and the gentlemen of the new Government, down to the meanest Jack-in-office, received their salary regularly.

The people suffer. With the childlike faith, with the good humour of the masses who believe in their leaders, they think that “yonder,” in the House, in the Town Hall, in the Committee of Public Safety, their welfare is being considered. But “yonder” they are discussing everything under the sun except the welfare of the people. In 1793, while famine ravaged France and crippled the Revolution; whilst the people were reduced to the depths of misery, whilst the Champs Élysée were lined with luxurious carriages where women displayed their jewels and splendour, Robespierre was urging the Jacobins to discuss his treatise on the English Constitution. While the worker was suffering in 1848 from the general stoppage of trade the Provisional Government and the House were wrangling over military pensions and prison labour, without troubling how the people were to live during this crisis. And could one cast a reproach at the Paris Commune, which was born beneath the Prussian cannon, and lasted only seventy days, it would be for this same error — this failure to understand that the Revolution could not triumph unless those who fought on its side were fed, that on fifteen pence a day a man cannot fight on the ramparts and at the same time support a family.

The people suffer and say: “How to find the way out of these difficulties?”
III

It seems to us that there is only one answer to this question: We must recognize, and loudly proclaim, that every one, whatever his grade in the old society, whether strong or weak, capable or incapable, has, before everything, THE RIGHT TO LIVE, and that society is bound to share amongst all, without exception, the means of existence at its disposal. We must acknowledge this, and proclaim it aloud, and act up to it.

It must be so contrived that from the first day of the revolution the worker shall know that a new era is opening before him; that henceforward none need crouch under the bridges, with palaces hard by, none need fast in the midst of food, none need perish with cold near shops full of furs; that all is for all, in practice as well as in theory, and that at last, for the first time in history, a revolution has been accomplished which considers the NEEDS of the people before schooling them in their DUTIES.

This cannot be brought about by Acts of Parliament, but only by taking immediate and effective possession of all that is necessary to ensure the well-being of all; this is the only really scientific way of going to work, the only way to be understood and desired by the mass of the people. We must take possession, in the name of the people, of the granaries, the shops full of clothing, and the dwelling houses. Nothing must be wasted. We must organize without delay to feed the hungry, to satisfy all wants, to meet all needs, to produce, not for the special benefit of this one or that one, but to ensure that society as a whole will live and grow.

Enough of ambiguous words like “the right to work,” with which the people were misled in 1848, and which are still used to mislead them. Let us have the courage to recognize that Well-being for all, henceforward possible, must be realized.

When the workers claimed the right to work in 1848, national and municipal workshops were organized, and workmen were sent to drudge there at the rate of 1s. 8d. a day! When they asked that labour should be organized, the reply was: “Patience, friends, the Government will see to it; meantime here is your 1s. 8d. Rest now, brave toiler, after your lifelong struggle for food!” Meantime the cannons were trained, the reserves called out, and the workers themselves disorganized by the many methods well known to the middle classes, till one fine day they were told to go and colonize Africa or be shot down.

Very different will be the result if the workers claim the right to well-being! In claiming that right they claim the right to possess the wealth of the community — to take the houses to dwell in, according to the needs of each family; to seize the stores of food and learn the meaning of plenty, after having known famine too well. They proclaim their right to all wealth — fruit of the labour of past and present generations — and learn by its means to enjoy those higher pleasures of art and science too long monopolized by the middle classes.

And while asserting their right to live in comfort, they assert, what is still more important, their right to decide for themselves what this comfort shall be, what must be produced to ensure it, and what discarded as no longer of value.

The “right to well-being” means the possibility of living like human beings, and of bringing up children to be members of a society better than ours, whilst the “right to work” only means the right to be always a wage-slave, a drudge, ruled over and exploited by the middle class of the future. The right to well-being is the Social Revolution, the right to work means nothing but the Treadmill of Commercialism. It is high time for the worker to assert his right to the common inheritance and to enter into possession.
Chapter 3: Anarchist Communism
I

Every society which has abolished private property will be forced, we maintain, to organize itself on the lines of Communistic Anarchy. Anarchy leads to Communism, and Communism to Anarchy, both alike being expressions of the predominant tendency in modern societies, the pursuit of equality.

Time was when a peasant family could consider the corn which it grew, or the woollen garments woven in the cottage, as the products of its own toil. But even then this way of looking at things was not quite correct. There were the roads and the bridges made in common, the swamps drained by common toil, and the communal pastures enclosed by hedges which were kept in repair by each and all. If the looms for weaving or the dyes for colouring fabrics were improved, all profited; so even in those days a peasant family could not live alone, but was dependent in a thousand ways on the village or the commune.

But nowadays, in the present state of industry, when everything is interdependent, when each branch of production is knit up with all the rest, the attempt to claim an Individualist origin for the products of industry is absolutely untenable. The astonishing perfection attained by the textile or mining industries in civilized countries is due to the simultaneous development of a thousand other industries, great and small, to the extension of the railroad system, to inter-oceanic navigation, to the manual skill of thousands of workers, to a certain standard of culture reached by the working classes as a whole, to the labours, in short, of men in every corner of the globe.

The Italians who died of cholera while making the Suez Canal, or of anchylosis in the St. Gothard Tunnel, and the Americans mowed down by shot and shell while fighting for the abolition of slavery have helped to develop the cotton industry in France and England, as well as the work-girls who languish in the factories of Manchester and Rouen, and the inventor who (following the suggestion of some worker) succeeds in improving the looms.

How, then, shall we estimate the share of each in the riches which ALL contribute to amass?

Looking at production from this general, synthetic point of view, we cannot hold with the Collectivists that payment proportionate to the hours of labour rendered by each would be an ideal arrangement, or even a step in the right direction.

Without discussing whether exchange value of goods is really measured in existing societies by the amount of work necessary to produce it — according to the doctrine of Smith and Ricardo, in whose footsteps Marx has followed — suffice it to say here, leaving ourselves free to return to the subject later, that the Collectivist ideal appears to us untenable in a society which considers the instruments of labour as a common inheritance. Starting from this principle, such a society would find itself forced from the very outset to abandon all forms of wages.

The mitigated individualism of the collectivist system certainly could not maintain itself alongside a partial communism — the socialization of land and the instruments of production. A new form of property requires a new form of remuneration. A new method of production cannot exist side by side with the old forms of consumption, any more than it can adapt itself to the old forms of political organization.

The wage system arises out of the individual ownership of the land and the instruments of labour. It was the necessary condition for the development of capitalist production, and will perish with it, in spite of the attempt to disguise it as “profit-sharing.” The common possession of the instruments of labour must necessarily bring with it the enjoyment in common of the fruits of common labour.

We hold further that Communism is not only desirable, but that existing societies, founded on Individualism, are inevitably impelled in the direction of Communism. The development of Individualism during the last three centuries is explained by the efforts of the individual to protect himself from the tyranny of Capital and of the State. For a time he imagined, and those who expressed his thought for him declared, that he could free himself entirely from the State and from society. “By means of money,” he said, “I can buy all that I need.” But the individual was on a wrong tack, and modern history has taught him to recognize that, without the help of all, he can do nothing, although his strong-boxes are full of gold.

In fact, alongside this current of Individualism, we find in all modern history a tendency, on the one hand, to retain all that remains of the partial Communism of antiquity, and, on the other, to establish the Communist principle in the thousand developments of modern life.

As soon as the communes of the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth centuries had succeeded in emancipating themselves from their lords, ecclesiastical or lay, their communal labour and communal consumption began to extend and develop rapidly. The township — and not private persons — freighted ships and equipped expeditions, and the benefit arising from the foreign trade did not accrue to individuals, but was shared by all. The townships also bought provisions for their citizens. Traces of these institutions have lingered on into the nineteenth century, and the folk piously cherish the memory of them in their legends.

All that has disappeared. But the rural township still struggles to preserve the last traces of this Communism, and it succeeds — except when the State throws its heavy sword into the balance.

Meanwhile new organizations, based on the same principle — to every man according to his needs — spring up under a thousand different forms; for without a certain leaven of Communism the present societies could not exist. In spite of the narrowly egoistic turn given to men’s minds by the commercial system, the tendency towards Communism is constantly appearing, and influences our activities in a variety of ways.

The bridges, for the use of which a toll was levied in the old days, are now become public property and free to all; so are the high roads, except in the East, where a toll is still exacted from the traveller for every mile of his journey. Museums, free libraries, free schools, free meals for children; parks and gardens open to all; streets paved and lighted, free to all; water supplied to every house without measure or stint — all such arrangements are founded on the principle: “Take what you need.”

The tramways and railways have already introduced monthly and annual season tickets, without limiting the number of journeys taken; and two nations, Hungary and Russia, have introduced on their railways the zone system, which permits the holder to travel five hundred or a thousand miles for the same price. It is but a short step from that to a uniform charge, such as already prevails in the postal service. In all these innovations, and a thousand others, the tendency is not to measure the individual consumption. One man wants to travel a thousand miles, another five hundred. These are personal requirements. There is no sufficient reason why one should pay twice as much as the other because his need is twice as great. Such are the signs which appear even now in our individualist societies.

Moreover, there is a tendency, though still a feeble one, to consider the needs of the individual, irrespective of his past or possible services to the community. We are beginning to think of society as a whole, each part of which is so intimately bound up with the others that a service rendered to one is a service rendered to all.

When you go into a public library — not indeed the National Library of Paris, but, say, into the British Museum or the Berlin Library — the librarian does not ask what services you have rendered to society before giving you the book, or the fifty books which you require, and he comes to your assistance if you do not know how to manage the catalogue. By means of uniform credentials — and very often a contribution of work is preferred — the scientific society opens its museums, its gardens, its library, its laboratories, and its annual conversaziones to each of its members, whether he be a Darwin, or a simple amateur.

At St. Petersburg, if you are pursuing an invention, you go into a special laboratory or a workshop, where you are given a place, a carpenter’s bench, a turning lathe, all the necessary tools and scientific instruments, provided only you know how to use them; and you are allowed to work there as long as you please. There are the tools; interest others in your idea, join with fellow workers skilled in various crafts, or work alone if you prefer it. Invent a flying machine, or invent nothing — that is your own affair. You are pursuing an idea — that is enough.

In the same way, those who man the lifeboat do not ask credentials from the crew of a sinking ship; they launch their boat, risk their lives in the raging waves, and sometimes perish, all to save men whom they do not even know. And what need to know them? “They are human beings, and they need our aid — that is enough, that establishes their right — To the rescue!

Thus we find a tendency, eminently communistic, springing up on all sides, and in various guises, in the very heart of theoretically individualist societies.”

Suppose that one of our great cities, so egotistic in ordinary times, were visited to-morrow by some calamity — a siege, for instance — that same selfish city would decide that the first needs to satisfy were those of the children and the aged. Without asking what services they had rendered, or were likely to render to society, it would first of all feed them. Then the combatants would be cared for, irrespective of the courage or the intelligence which each has displayed, and thousands of men and women would outvie each other in unselfish devotion to the wounded.

This tendency exists and is felt as soon as the most pressing needs of each are satisfied, and in proportion as the productive power of the race increases. It becomes an active force every time a great idea comes to oust the mean preoccupations of everyday life.

How can we doubt, then, that when the instruments of production are placed at the service of all, when business is conducted on Communist principles, when labour, having recovered its place of honour in society, produces much more than is necessary to all — how can we doubt but that this force (already so powerful) will enlarge its sphere of action till it becomes the ruling principle of social life?

Following these indications, and considering further the practical side of expropriation, of which we shall speak in the following chapters, we are convinced that our first obligation, when the revolution shall have broken the power upholding the present system, will be to realize Communism without delay.

But ours is neither the Communism of Fourier and the Phalansteriens, nor of the German State-Socialists. It is Anarchist Communism, — Communism without government — the Communism of the Free. It is the synthesis of the two ideals pursued by humanity throughout the ages — Economic and Political Liberty.
II

In taking “Anarchy” for our ideal of political organization we are only giving expression to another marked tendency of human progress. Whenever European societies have developed up to a certain point they have shaken off the yoke of authority and substituted a system founded roughly more or less on the principles of individual liberty. And history shows us that these periods of partial or general revolution, when the governments were overthrown, were also periods of sudden progress both in the economic and the intellectual field. Now it is the enfranchisement of the communes, whose monuments, produced by the free labour of the guilds, have never been surpassed; now it is the peasant rising which brought about the Reformation and imperilled the papacy; and then again it is the society, free for a brief space, which was created at the other side of the Atlantic by the malcontents from the Old World.

Further, if we observe the present development of civilized peoples we see, most unmistakably, a movement ever more and more marked to limit the sphere of action of the Government, and to allow more and more liberty to the individual. This evolution is going on before our eyes, though cumbered by the ruins and rubbish of old institutions and old superstitions. Like all evolutions, it only waits a revolution to overthrow the old obstacles which block the way, that it may find free scope in a regenerated society.

After having striven long in vain to solve the insoluble problem — the problem of constructing a government “which will constrain the individual to obedience without itself ceasing to be the servant of society,” men at last attempt to free themselves from every form of government and to satisfy their need for organization by a free contract between individuals and groups pursuing the same aim. The independence of each small territorial unit becomes a pressing need; mutual agreement replaces law, and everywhere regulates individual interests in view of a common object.

All that was once looked on as a function of the Government is to-day called in question. Things are arranged more easily and more satisfactorily without the intervention of the State. And in studying the progress made in this direction, we are led to conclude that the tendency of the human race is to reduce Government interference to zero; in fact, to abolish the State, the personification of injustice, oppression, and monopoly.

We can already catch glimpses of a world in which the bonds which bind the individual are no longer laws, but social habits — the result of the need felt by each one of us to seek the support, the co-operation, the sympathy of his neighbours.

Assuredly the idea of a society without a State will give rise to at least as many objections as the political economy of a society without private capital. We have all been brought up from our childhood to regard the State as a sort of Providence; all our education, the Roman history we learned at school, the Byzantine code which we studied later under the name of Roman law, and the various sciences taught at the universities, accustom us to believe in Government and in the virtues of the State providential.

To maintain this superstition whole systems of philosophy have been elaborated and taught; all politics are based on this principle; and each politician, whatever his colours, comes forward and says to the people, “Give me the power, and I both can and will free you from the miseries which press so heavily upon you.”

From the cradle to the grave all our actions are guided by this principle. Open any book on sociology or jurisprudence, and you will find there the Government, its organization, its acts, filling so large a place that we come to believe that there is nothing outside the Government and the world of statesmen.

The press teaches us the same in every conceivable way. Whole columns are devoted to parliamentary debates and to political intrigues. The vast every day life of a nation is barely mentioned in a few lines when dealing with economic subjects, law, or in “divers facts” relating to police cases. And when you read these newspapers, you hardly think of the incalculable number of beings — all humanity, so to say — who grow up and die, who know sorrow, who work and consume, think and create outside the few encumbering personages who have been so magnified that humanity is hidden by their shadows enlarged by our ignorance.

And yet as soon as we pass from printed matter; to life itself, as soon as we throw a glance at society, we are struck by the infinitesimal part played by the Government. Balzac already remarked how millions of peasants spend the whole of their lives without knowing anything about the State, save the heavy taxes they are compelled to pay. Every day millions of transactions are made without Government intervention, and the greatest of them — those of commerce and of the Exchange — are carried on in such a way that the Government could not be appealed to if one of the contracting parties had the intention of not fulfilling his agreement. Should you speak to a man who understands commerce he will tell you that the everyday business transacted by merchants would be absolutely impossible were it not based on mutual confidence. The habit of keeping his word, the desire not to lose his credit, amply suffice to maintain this relative honesty. The man who does not feel the slightest remorse when poisoning his customers with noxious drugs covered with pompous labels thinks he is in honour bound to keep his engagements. Now, if this relative morality has developed under present conditions, when enrichment is the only incentive and the only aim, can we doubt its rapid progress when appropriation of the fruits of others’ labour will no longer be the basis of society?

Another striking fact, which especially characterizes our generation, speaks still more in favour of our ideas. It is the continual extension of the field of enterprise due to private initiative, and the prodigious development of free groups of all kinds. We shall discuss this more at length in the chapter devoted to Free Agreement. Suffice it to mention that the facts are so numerous and so customary that they are the essence of the second half of the nineteenth century, even though political and socialist writers ignore them, always preferring to talk to us about the functions of Government.

These organizations, free and infinitely varied, are so natural an outcome of our civilization; they expand so rapidly and group themselves with so much ease; they are so necessary a result of the continual growth of the needs of civilized man; and lastly, they so advantageously replace governmental interference that we must recognize in them a factor of growing importance in the life of societies. If they do not yet spread over the whole of the manifestations of life, it is that they find an insurmountable obstacle in the poverty of the worker, in the casts of present society, in the private appropriation of capital, and in the State. Abolish these obstacles and you will see them covering the immense field of civilized man’s activity.

The history of the last fifty years furnishes a living proof that Representative Government is impotent to discharge the functions we have sought to assign to it. In days to come the nineteenth century will be quoted as having witnessed the failure of parliamentarianism.

But this impotence is becoming evident to all; the faults of parliamentarianism, and the inherent vices of the representative principle, are self-evident, and the few thinkers who have made a critical study of them (J. S. Mill and Leverdays) did but give literary form to the popular dissatisfaction. It is not difficult, indeed, to see the absurdity of naming a few men and saying to them, “Make laws regulating all our spheres of activity, although not one of you knows anything about them!”

We are beginning to see that government by majorities means abandoning all the affairs of the country to the tide-waiters who make up the majorities in the House and in election committees; to those, in a word, who have no opinion of their own. But mankind is seeking and already finding new issues.

The International Postal Union, the railway unions, and the learned societies give us examples of solutions based on free agreement in place and stead of law.

To-day, when groups scattered far and wide wish to organize themselves for some object or other, they no longer elect an international parliament of Jacks-of-all-trades. No, where it is not possible to meet directly or come to an agreement by correspondence, delegates versed in the question at issue are sent to treat, with the instructions: “Endeavour to come to an agreement on such or such a question and then return not with a law in your pocket, but with a proposition of agreement which we may or may not accept.”

Such is the method of the great industrial companies, the learned societies, and the associations of every description, which already cover Europe and the United States. And such should be the method of an emancipated society. While bringing about expropriation, society cannot continue to organize itself on the principle of parliamentary representation. A society founded on serfdom is in keeping with absolute monarchy; a society based on the wage system and the exploitation of the masses by the capitalists finds its political expression in parliamentarianism. But a free society, regaining possession of the common inheritance, must seek, in free groups and free federations of groups, a new organization, in harmony with the new economic phase of history.

Every economic phase has a political phase corresponding to it, and it would be impossible to touch property without finding at the same time a new mode of political life.
Chapter 4: Expropriation
I

It is told of Rothschild that, seeing his fortune threatened by the Revolution of 1848, he hit upon the following stratagem: “I am quite willing to admit,” said he, “that my fortune has been accumulated at the expense of others, but if it were divided to-morrow among the millions of Europe, the share of each would only amount to five shillings. Very well, then, I undertake to render to each his five shillings if he asks me for it.”

Having given due publicity to his promise, our millionaire proceeded as usual to stroll quietly through the streets of Frankfort. Three or four passers-by asked for their five shillings, which he disbursed with a sardonic smile. His stratagem succeeded, and the family of the millionaire is still in possession of its wealth.

It is in much the same fashion that the shrewd heads among the middle classes reason when they say, “Ah, Expropriation! I know what that means. You take all the overcoats and lay them in a heap, and every one is free to help himself and fight for the best.”

But such jests are irrelevant as well as flippant. What we want is not a redistribution of overcoats, although it must be said that even in such a case, the shivering folk would see advantage in it. Nor do we want to divide up the wealth of the Rothschilds. What we do want is so to arrange things that every human being born into the world shall be ensured the opportunity in the first instance of learning some useful occupation, and of becoming skilled in it; next, that he shall be free to work at his trade without asking leave of master or owner, and without handing over to landlord or capitalist the lion’s share of what he produces. As to the wealth held by the Rothschilds or the Vanderbilts, it will serve us to organize our system of communal production.

The day when the labourer may till the ground without paying away half of what he produces, the day when the machines necessary to prepare the soil for rich harvests are at the free disposal of the cultivators, the day when the worker in the factory produces for the community and not the monopolist — that day will see the workers clothed and fed, and there will be no more Rothschilds or other exploiters.

No one will then have to sell his working power for a wage that only represents a fraction of what he produces.

“So far so good,” say our critics, “but you will have Rothschilds coming in from outside. How are you to prevent a person from amassing millions in China and then settling amongst you? How are you going to prevent such a one from surrounding himself with lackeys and wage-slaves — from exploiting them and enriching himself at their expense?”

“You cannot bring about a revolution all over the world at the same time. Well, then, are you going to establish custom-houses on your frontiers to search all who enter your country and confiscate the money they bring with them? — Anarchist policemen firing on travellers would be a fine spectacle!”

But at the root of this argument there is a great error. Those who propound it have never paused to inquire whence come the fortunes of the rich. A little thought would, however, suffice to show them that these fortunes have their beginnings in the poverty of the poor. When there are no longer any destitute there will no longer be any rich to exploit them.

Let us glance for a moment at the Middle Ages, when great fortunes began to spring up.

A feudal baron seizes on a fertile valley. But as long as the fertile valley is empty of folk our baron is not rich. His land brings him in nothing; he might as well possess a property in the moon.

What does our baron do to enrich himself? He looks out for peasants — for poor peasants!

If every peasant-farmer had a piece of land, free from rent and taxes, if he had in addition the tools and the stock necessary for farm labour, who would plough the lands of the baron? Everyone would look after his own. But there are thousands of destitute persons ruined by wars, or drought, or pestilence. They have neither horse nor plough. (Iron was costly in the Middle Ages, and a draughthorse still more so.)

All these destitute creatures are trying to better their condition. One day they see on the road at the confines of our baron’s estate a notice-board indicating by certain signs adapted to their comprehension that the labourer who is willing to settle on this estate will receive the tools and materials to build his cottage and sow his fields, and a portion of land rent free for a certain number of years. The number of years is represented by so many crosses on the sign-board, and the peasant understands the meaning of these crosses.

So the poor wretches swarm over the baron’s lands, making roads, draining marshes, building villages. In nine years he begins to tax them. Five years later he increases the rent. Then he doubles it. The peasant accepts these new conditions because he cannot find better ones elsewhere; and little by little, with the aid of laws made by the barons, the poverty of the peasant becomes the source of the landlord’s wealth. And it is not only the lord of the manor who preys upon him. A whole host of usurers swoop down upon the villages, multiplying as the wretchedness of the peasants increases. That is how things went in the Middle Ages. And to-day is it not still the same thing? If there were free lands which the peasant could cultivate if he pleased, would he pay £50 to some “shabble of a duke”[2] for condescending to sell him a scrap? Would he burden himself with a lease which absorbed a third of the produce? Would he — on the métayer system — consent to give the half of his harvest to the landowner?

But he has nothing. So he will accept any conditions, if only he can keep body and soul together, while he tills the soil and enriches the landlord.

So in the nineteenth century, just as in the Middle Ages, the poverty of the peasant is a source of wealth to the landed proprietor.
II

The landlord owes his riches to the poverty of the peasants, and the wealth of the capitalist comes from the same source.

Take the case of a citizen of the middle class, who somehow or other finds himself in possession of £20,000. He could, of course, spend his money at the rate of £2,000 a year, a mere bagatelle in these days of fantastic, senseless luxury. But then he would have nothing left at the end of ten years. So, being a “practical person,” he prefers to keep his fortune intact, and win for himself a snug little annual income as well.

This is very easy in our society, for the good reason that the towns and villages swarm with workers who have not the wherewithal to live for a month, or even a fortnight. So our worthy citizen starts a factory. The banks hasten to lend him another £20,000, especially if he has a reputation for “business ability”; and with this round sum he can command the labour of five hundred hands.

If all the men and women in the country-side had their daily bread sure and their daily needs already satisfied, who would work for our capitalist at a wage of half a crown a day, while the commodities one produces in a day sell in the market for a crown or more?

Unhappily — we know it all too well — the poor quarters of our towns and the neighbouring villages are full of needy wretches, whose children clamour for bread. So, before the factory is well finished, the workers hasten to offer themselves. Where a hundred are required three hundred besiege the doors, and from the time his mill is started the owner, if he only has average business capacities, will clear £40 a year out of each mill-hand he employs.

He is thus able to lay by a snug little fortune; and if he chooses a lucrative trade and has “business talents” he will soon increase his income by doubling the number of the men he exploits.

So he becomes a personage of importance. He can afford to give dinners to others personages — to the local magnates, the civic, legal, and political dignitaries. With his money he can “marry money”; by and by he may pick and choose places for his children, and later on perhaps get something good from the Government — a contract for the army or for the police. His gold breeds gold; till at last a war, or even a rumour of war, or a speculation on the Stock Exchange, gives him his great opportunity.

Nine-tenths of the great fortunes made in the United States are (as Henry George has shown in this “Social Problems”) the result of knavery on a large scale, assisted by the State. In Europe, nine-tenths of the fortunes made in our monarchies and republics have the same origin. There are not two ways of becoming a millionaire.

This is the secret of wealth; find the starving and destitute, pay them half a crown, and make them produce five shillings worth in the day, amass a fortune by these means, and then increase it by some lucky hit, made with the help of the State.

Need we go on to speak of small fortunes attributed by the economists to forethought and frugality, when we know that mere saving in itself brings in nothing, so long as the pence saved are not used to exploit the famishing?

Take a shoemaker, for instance. Grant that his work is well paid, that he has plenty of custom, and that by dint of strict frugality he contrives to lay by from eighteen pence to two shillings a day, perhaps two pounds a month.

Grant that our shoemaker is never ill, that he does not half starve himself, in spite of his passion for economy; that he does not marry or that he has no children; that he does not die of consumption; suppose anything and everything you please!

Well, at the age of fifty he will not have scraped together £800; and he will not have enough to live on during his old age, when he is past work. Assuredly this is not how great fortunes are made. But suppose our shoemaker, as soon as he has laid by a few pence, thriftily conveys them to the savings bank, and that the savings bank lends them to the capitalist who is just about to “employ labour,” i.e. to exploit the poor. Then our shoemaker takes an apprentice, the child of some poor wretch, who will think himself lucky if in five years time his son has learned the trade and is able to earn his living.

Meanwhile our shoemaker does not lose by him, and if trade is brisk he soon takes a second, and then a third apprentice. By and by he will take two or three working men — poor wretches, thankful to receive half a crown a day for work that is worth five shillings, and if our shoemaker is “in luck,” that is to say, if he is keen enough and mean enough, his working men and apprentices will bring him in nearly one pound a day, over and above the product of his own toil. He can then enlarge his business. He will gradually become rich, and no longer have any need to stint himself in the necessaries of life. He will leave a snug little fortune to his son.

That is what people call “being economical and having frugal, temperate habits.” At bottom it is nothing more nor less than grinding the face of the poor.

Commerce seems an exception to this rule. “Such a man,” we are told, “buys tea in China, brings it to France, and realizes a profit of thirty per cent on his original outlay. He has exploited nobody.”

Nevertheless the case is analogous. If our merchant had carried his bales on his back, well and good! In early medieval times that was exactly how foreign trade was conducted, and so no one reached such giddy heights of fortune as in our days. Very few and very hardly earned were the gold coins which the medieval merchant gained from a long and dangerous voyage. It was less the love of money than the thirst of travel and adventure that inspired his undertakings.

Nowadays the method is simpler. A merchant who has some capital need not stir from his desk to become wealthy. He telegraphs to an agent telling him to buy a hundred tons of tea; he freights a ship, and in a few weeks, in three months if it is a sailing ship, the vessel brings him his cargo. He does not even take the risks of the voyage, for his tea and his vessel are insured, and if he has expended four thousand pounds he will receive more than five thousand; that is to say, if he has not attempted to speculate in some novel commodities, in which case he runs a chance of either doubling his fortune or losing it altogether.

Now, how could he find men willing to cross the sea, to travel to China and back, to endure hardship and slavish toil and to risk their lives for a miserable pittance? How could he find dock labourers willing to load and unload his ships for “starvation wages”? How? Because they are needy and starving. Go to the seaports, visit the cook-shops and taverns on the quays, and look at these men who have come to hire themselves, crowding round the dock-gates, which they besiege from early dawn, hoping to be allowed to work on the vessels. Look at these sailors, happy to be hired for a long voyage, after weeks and months of waiting. All their lives long they have gone to the sea in ships, and they will sail in others still, until they have perished in the waves.

Enter their homes, look at their wives and children in rags, living one knows not how till the father’s return, and you will have the answer to the question. Multiply examples, choose them where you will, consider the origin of all fortunes, large or small, whether arising out of commerce, finance, manufactures, or the land. Everywhere you will find that the wealth of the wealthy springs from the poverty of the poor. This is why an anarchist society need not fear the advent of a Rothschild who would settle in its midst. If every member of the community knows that after a few hours of productive toil he will have a right to all the pleasures that civilization procures, and to those deeper sources of enjoyment which art and science offer to all who seek them, he will not sell his strength for a starvation wage. No one will volunteer to work for the enrichment of your Rothschild. His golden guineas will be only so many pieces of metal — useful for various purposes, but incapable of breeding more.

In answering the above objection we have at the same time indicated the scope of Expropriation. It must apply to everything that enables any man — be he financier, mill-owner, or landlord — to appropriate the product of others’ toil. Our formula is simple and comprehensive.

We do not want to rob any one of his coat, but we wish to give to the workers all those things the lack of which makes them fall an easy prey to the exploiter, and we will do our utmost that none shall lack aught, that not a single man shall be forced to sell the strength of his right arm to obtain a bare subsistence for himself and his babes. This is what we mean when we talk of Expropriation; this will be our duty during the Revolution, for whose coming we look, not two hundred years hence, but soon, very soon.
III

The ideas of Anarchism in general and of Expropriation in particular find much more sympathy than we are apt to imagine among men of independent character, and those for whom idleness is not the supreme ideal. “Still,” our friends often warn us, “take care you do not go too far! Humanity cannot be changed in a day, so do not be in too great a hurry with your schemes of Expropriation and Anarchy, or you will be in danger of achieving no permanent result.”

Now, what we fear with regard to Expropriation is exactly the contrary. We are afraid of not going far enough, of carrying out Expropriation on too small a scale to be lasting. We would not have the revolutionary impulse arrested in mid-career, to exhaust itself in half measures, which would content no one, and while producing a tremendous confusion in society, and stopping its customary activities, would have no vital power — would merely spread general discontent and inevitably prepare the way for the triumph of reaction.

There are, in fact, in a modern State established relations which it is practically impossible to modify if one attacks them only in detail. There are wheels within wheels in our economic organization — the machinery is so complex and interdependent that no one part can be modified without disturbing the whole. This becomes clear as soon as an attempt is made to expropriate anything.

Let us suppose that in a certain country a limited form of expropriation is effected. For example, that, as it has been suggested more than once, only the property of the great landlords is socialized, whilst the factories are left untouched; or that, in a certain city, house property is taken over by the Commune, but everything else is left in private ownership; or that, in some manufacturing centre, the factories are communalized, but the land is not interfered with.

The same result would follow in each case — a terrible shattering of the industrial system, without the means of reorganizing it on new lines. Industry and finance would be at a deadlock, yet a return to the first principles of justice would not have been achieved, and society would find itself powerless to construct a harmonious whole.

If agriculture could free itself from great landowners, while industry still remained the bondslave of the capitalist, the merchant, and the banker, nothing would be accomplished. The peasant suffers to-day not only in having to pay rent to the landlord; he is oppressed on all hands by existing conditions. He is exploited by the tradesman, who makes him pay half a crown for a spade which, measured by tile labour spent on it, is not worth more than sixpence. He is taxed by the State, which cannot do without its formidable hierarchy of officials, and finds it necessary to maintain an expensive army, because the traders of all nations are perpetually fighting for the markets, and any day a little quarrel arising from the exploitation of some part of Asia or Africa may result in war.

Then again the peasant suffers from the depopulation of country places: the young people are attracted to the large manufacturing towns by the bait of high wages paid temporarily by the producers of articles of luxury, or by the attractions of a more stirring life. The artificial protection of industry, the industrial exploitation of foreign countries, the prevalence of stock-jobbing, the difficulty of improving the soil and the machinery of production — all these agencies combine nowadays to work against agriculture, which is burdened not only by rent, but by the whole complex of conditions in a society based on exploitation. Thus, even if the expropriation of land were accomplished, and every one were free to till the soil and cultivate it to the best advantage, without paying rent, agriculture, even though it should enjoy — which can by no means be taken for granted — a momentary prosperity, would soon fall back into the slough in which it finds itself to-day. The whole thing would have to be begun over again, with increased difficulties.

The same holds true of industry. Take the converse case: instead of turning the agricultural labourers into peasant-proprietors, make over the factories to those who work in them. Abolish the master-manufacturers, but leave the landlord his land, the banker his money, the merchant his Exchange, maintain the swarm of idlers who live on the toil of the workmen, the thousand and one middlemen, the State with its numberless officials, and industry would come to a standstill. Finding no purchasers in the mass of peasants who would remain poor; not possessing the raw material, and unable to export their produce, partly on account of the stoppage of trade, and still more so because industries spread all over the world, the manufacturers would feel unable to struggle, and thousands of workers would be thrown upon the streets. These starving crowds would be ready and willing to submit to the first schemer who came to exploit them; they would even consent to return to the old slavery, if only under promise of work.

Or, finally, suppose you oust the landowners, and hand over the mills and factories to the worker, without interfering with the swarm of middlemen who drain the product of our manufacturers, and speculate in corn and flour, meat and groceries, in our great centres of commerce. Then, as soon as exchange is arrested, the great cities are left without bread, and others find no buyers for their articles of luxury, a terrible counter-revolution will take place — a counter-revolution treading upon the slain, sweeping the towns and villages with shot and shell; there would be proscriptions, panic, flight, tend all the terrors of the guillotine, as it was in France in 1815, 1848, and 1871.

All is interdependent in a civilized society; it is impossible to reform any one thing without altering the whole. Therefore, on the day we strike at private property, under any one of its forms, territorial or industrial, we shall be obliged to attack them all. The very success of the Revolution will demand it.

Besides, we could not, if we would, confine ourselves to a partial expropriation. Once the principle of the “Divine Right of Property” is shaken, no amount of theorizing will prevent its overthrow, here by the slaves of the toil, there by the slaves of the machine.

If a great town, Paris for example, were to confine itself to taking possession of the dwelling houses or the factories, it would be forced also to deny the right of the bankers to levy upon the Commune a tax amounting to £2,000,000 in the form of interest for former loans. The great city would be obliged to put itself in touch with the rural districts, and its influence would inevitably urge the peasants to free themselves from the landowner. It would be necessary to communalize the railways, that the citizens might get food and work, and lastly, to prevent the waste of supplies, and to guard against the trust of corn-speculators, like those to whom the Commune of 1793 fell a prey, it would have to place in the hands of the City the work of stocking its warehouses with commodities, and apportioning the produce.

Nevertheless, some Socialists still seek to establish a distinction. “Of course,” they say, “the soil, the mines, the mills, and manufactures must be expropriated, these are the instruments of production, and it is right we should consider them public property. But articles of consumption — food, clothes, and dwellings — should remain private property.”

Popular common sense has got the better of this subtle distinction. We are not savages who can live in the woods, without other shelter than the branches. The civilized man needs a roof, a room, a hearth, and a bed. It is true that the bed, the room, and the house is a home of idleness for the non-producer. But for the worker, a room, properly heated and lighted, is as much an instrument of production as the tool or the machine. It is the place where the nerves and sinews gather strength for the work of the morrow. The rest of the workman is the daily repairing of the machine.

The same argument applies even more obviously to food. The so-called economists of whom we speak would hardly deny that the coal burnt in a machine is as necessary to production as the raw material itself. How then can food, without which the human machine could do no work, be excluded from the list of things indispensable to the producer? Can this be a relic of religious metaphysics? The rich man’s feast is indeed a matter of luxury, but the food of the worker is just as much a part of production as the fuel burnt by the steam-engine.

The same with clothing. If the economists who draw this distinction between articles of production and of consumption dressed themselves in the fashion of New Guinea, we could understand their objection. But men who could not write a word without a shirt on their back are not in a position to draw such a hard and fast line between their shirt and their pen. And though the dainty gowns of their dames must certainly rank as objects of luxury, there is nevertheless a certain quantity of linen, cotton, and woollen stuff which is a necessity of life to the producer. The shirt and shoes in which he goes to his work, his cap and the jacket he slips on after the day’s toil is over, these are as necessary to him as the hammer to the anvil.

Whether we like it or not, this is what the people mean by a revolution. As soon as they have made a clean sweep of the Government, they will seek first of all to ensure to themselves decent dwellings and sufficient food and clothes — free of capitalist rent.

And the people will be right. The methods of the people will be much more in accordance with science than those of the economists who draw so many distinctions between instruments of production and articles of consumption. The people understand that this is just the point where the Revolution ought to begin; and they will lay the foundations of the only economic science worthy the name — a science which might be called “The Study of the Needs of Humanity, and of the Economic Means to satisfy them.”
Chapter 5: Food
I

If the coming Revolution is to be a Social Revolution it will be distinguished from all former uprisings not only by its aim, but also by its methods. To attain a new end, new means are required.

The three great popular movements which we have seen in France during the last hundred years differ from each other in many ways, but they have one common feature.

In each case the people strove to overturn the old regime, and spent their heart’s blood for the cause. Then, after having borne the brunt of the battle, they sank again into obscurity. A Government, composed of men more or less honest, was formed and undertook to organize — the Republic in 1793, Labour in 1848, and the Free Commune in 1871. Imbued with Jacobin ideas, this Government occupied itself first of all with political questions, such as the reorganization of the machinery of government, the purifying of the administration, the separation of Church and State, civic liberty, and such matters. It is true the workmen’s clubs kept an eye on the members of the new Government, and often imposed their ideas on them. But even in these clubs, whether the leaders belonged to the middle or to the working classes, it was always middle-class ideas which prevailed. They discussed various political questions at great length, but forgot to discuss the question of bread.

Great ideas sprang up at such times, ideas that have moved the world; words were spoken which still stir our hearts, at the interval of a century. But the people were starving in the slums.

From the very commencement of the Revolution industry inevitably came to a stop — the circulation of produce was checked, and capital concealed itself. The master — the employer — had nothing to fear at such times, he battened on his dividends, if indeed he did not speculate on the wretchedness around; but the wage-earner was reduced to live from hand to mouth. Want knocked at the door.

Famine was abroad in the land — such famine as had hardly been seen under the old regime.

“The Girondists are starving us!” was the cry in the workmen’s quarters in 1793, and thereupon the Girondists were guillotined, and full powers were given to “the Mountain” and to the Commune. The Commune indeed concerned itself with the question of bread, and made heroic efforts to feed Paris. At Lyons, Fouché and Collot d’Herbois established city granaries, but the sums spent on filling them were woefully insufficient. The town councils made great efforts to procure corn; the bakers who hoarded flour were hanged — and still the people lacked bread.

Then they turned on the royalist conspirators and laid the blame at their door. They guillotined a dozen or fifteen a day — servants and duchesses alike, especially servants, for the duchesses had gone to Coblentz. But if they had guillotined a hundred dukes and viscounts every day, it would have been equally hopeless.

The want only grew. For the wage-earner can not live without his wage, and the wage was not forthcoming. What difference could a thousand corpses more or less make to him?

Then the people began to grow weary. “So much for your vaunted Revolution! You are more wretched than ever before,” whispered the reactionary in the ears of the worker. And little by little the rich took courage, emerged from their hiding-places, and flaunted their luxury in the face of the starving multitude. They dressed up like scented fops and said to the workers: “Come, enough of this foolery! What have you gained by rebellion?”

Sick at heart, his patience at an end, the revolutionary had at last to admit to himself that the cause was lost once more. He retreated into his hovel and awaited the worst.

Then reaction proudly asserted itself, and accomplished a politic stroke. The Revolution dead, nothing remained but to trample its corpse under foot.

The White Terror began. Blood flowed like water, the guillotine was never idle, the prisons were crowded, while the pageant of rank and fashion resumed its old course, and went on as merrily as before.

This picture is typical of all our revolutions. In 1848 the workers of Paris placed “three months of starvation” at the service of the Republic, and then, having reached the limit of their powers, they made one last desperate effort — an effort which was drowned in blood. In 1871 the Commune perished for lack of combatants. It had taken measures for the separation of Church and State, but it neglected, alas, until too late, to take measures for providing the people with bread. And so it came to pass in Paris that élégantes and fine gentlemen could spurn the confederates, and bid them go sell their lives for a miserable pittance, and leave their “betters” to feast at their ease in fashionable restaurants.

At last the Commune saw its mistake, and opened communal kitchens. But it was too late. Its days were already numbered, and the troops of Versailles were on the ramparts.

“Bread, it is bread that the Revolution needs!”

Let others spend their time in issuing pompous proclamations, in decorating themselves lavishly with official gold lace, and in talking about political liberty!...

Be it ours to see, from the first day of the Revolution to the last, in all the provinces fighting for freedom, that there is not a single man who lacks bread, not a single woman compelled to stand with the weariful crowd outside the bake-house-door, that haply a coarse loaf may be thrown to her in charity, not a single child pining for want of food.

It has always been the middle-class idea to harangue about “great principles” — great lies rather!

The idea of the people will be to provide bread for all. And while middle-class citizens, and workmen infested with middle-class ideas admire their own rhetoric in the “Talking Shops,” and “practical people” are engaged in endless discussions on forms of government, we, the “Utopian dreamers” — we shall have to consider the question of daily bread.

We have the temerity to declare that all have a right to bread, that there is bread enough for all, and that with this watchword of Bread for All the Revolution will triumph.
II

That we are Utopians is well known. So Utopian are we that we go the length of believing that the Revolution can and ought to assure shelter, food, and clothes to all — an idea extremely displeasing to middle-class citizens, whatever their party colour, for they are quite alive to the fact that it is not easy to keep the upper hand of a people whose hunger is satisfied.

All the same, we maintain our contention: bread must be found for the people of the Revolution, and the question of bread must take precedence of all other questions. If it is settled in the interests of the people, the Revolution will be on the right road; for in solving the question of Bread we must accept the principle of equality, which will force itself upon us to the exclusion of every other solution.

It is certain that the coming Revolution — like in that respect to the Revolution of 1848 — will burst upon us in the middle of a great industrial crisis. Things have been seething for half a century now, and can only go from bad to worse. Everything tends that way — new nations entering the, lists of international trade and fighting for possession of the world’s markets, wars, taxes ever increasing. National debts, the insecurity of the morrow, and huge colonial undertakings in every corner of the globe.

There are millions of unemployed workers in Europe at this moment. It will be still worse when Revolution has burst upon us and spread like fire laid to a train of gunpowder. The number of the out-of-works will be doubled as soon as barricades are erected in Europe and the United States. What is to be done to provide these multitudes with bread?

We do not know whether the folk who call them selves “practical people” have ever asked themselves this question in all its nakedness. But we do know that they wish to maintain the wage system, and we must therefore expect to have “national workshops” and “public works” vaunted as a means of giving food to the unemployed.

Because national workshops were opened in 1789 and in 1793; because the same means were resorted to in 1848; because Napoleon III succeeded in contenting the Parisian proletariat for eighteen years by giving them public works — which cost Paris to-day its debt of £80,000,000 — and its municipal tax of three or four pounds a-head;[3] because this excellent method of “taming the beast” was customary in Rome, and even in Egypt four thousand years ago; and lastly, because despots, kings, and emperors have always employed the ruse of throwing a scrap of food to the people to gain time to snatch up the whip — it is natural that “practical” men should extol this method of perpetuating the wage system. What need to rack our brains when we have the time-honoured method of the Pharaohs at our disposal?

Yet should the Revolution be so misguided as to start on this path, it would be lost.

In 1848, when the national workshops were opened on February 27, the unemployed of Paris numbered only 800; a fortnight later they had already increased to 49,000. They would soon have been 100,000, without counting those who crowded in from the provinces.

Yet at that time trade and manufacturers in France only employed half as many hands as to-day. And we know that in time of Revolution exchange and industry suffer most from the general upheaval.

To realize this we have only to think for a moment of the number of workmen whose labour depends directly or indirectly upon export trade, or of the number of hands employed in producing luxuries, whose consumers are the middle-class minority.

A revolution in Europe means the unavoidable stoppage of at least half the factories and workshops. It means millions of workers and their families thrown on the streets.

And our “practical men” would seek to avert this truly terrible situation by means of national relief works; that is to say, by means of new industries created on the spot to give work to the unemployed!

It is evident, as Proudhon has already pointed out, that the smallest attack upon property will bring in its train the complete disorganization of the system based upon private enterprise and wage labour. Society itself will be forced to take production in hand, in its entirety, and to reorganize it to meet the needs of the whole people. But this cannot be accomplished in a day or a month; it must take a certain time thus to reorganize the system of production, and during this time millions of men will be deprived of the means of subsistence. What then is to be done ?

There is only one really practical solution of the problem — boldly to face the great task which awaits us, and instead of trying to patch up a situation which we ourselves have made untenable, to proceed to reorganize production on a new basis.

Thus the really practical course of action, in our view, would be that the people should take immediate possession of all the food of the insurgent districts, keeping strict account of it all, that none might be wasted, and that by the aid of these accumulated resources every one might be able to tide over the crisis. During that time an agreement would have to be made with the factory workers, the necessary raw material given them and the means of subsistence assured to them while they worked to supply the needs of the agriculture population. For we must not forget that while France weaves silks and satins to deck the wives of German financiers, the Empress of Russia, and the Queen of the Sandwich Islands, and while Paris fashions wonderful trinkets and playthings for rich folk all the world over, two-thirds of the French peasantry have not proper lamps to give them light, or the implements necessary for modern agriculture. Lastly, unproductive land, of which there is plenty, would have to be turned to the best advantage, poor soils enriched, and rich soils, which yet, under the present system, do not yield a quarter, no, nor a tenth of what they might produce, submitted to intensive culture and tilled with as much care as a market garden or a flower plot. It is impossible to imagine any other practical solution of the problem; and, whether we like it or not, sheer force of circumstances will bring it to pass.
III

The most prominent characteristic of capitalism is the wage system, which in brief amounts to this: — A man, or a group of men, possessing the necessary capital, starts some industrial enterprise; he undertakes to supply the factory or workshops with raw material, to organize production, to pay the employés a fixed wage, and lastly, to pocket the surplus value or profits, under pretext of recouping himself for managing the concern, for running the risks it may involve, and for the fluctuations of price in the market value of the wares.

To preserve this system, those who now monopolize capital would be ready to make certain concessions; to share, for example, a part of the profits with the workers, or rather to establish a “sliding scale,” which would oblige them to raise wages when prices were high; in brief, they would consent to certain sacrifices on condition that they were still allowed to direct industry and to take its first fruits.

Collectivism, as we know, does not abolish wages, though it introduces considerable modifications into the existing order of things. It only substitutes the State, that is to say, Representative Government, national or local, for the individual employer of labour. Under Collectivism it is the representatives of the nation, or of the district, and their deputies and officials who are to have the control of industry. It is they who reserve to themselves the right of employing the surplus of; production — in the interests of all. Moreover, Collectivism draws a very subtle but very far reaching distinction between the work of the labourer and of the man who has learned a craft. Unskilled labour in the eyes of the collectivist is simple labour, while the work of the craftsman, the mechanic, the engineer, the man of science, etc., is what Marx calls complex labour, and is entitled to a higher wage. But labourers and craftsmen, weavers and men of science, are all wage-servants of the State — “all officials,” as was said lately, to gild the pill.

The coming Revolution can render no greater service to humanity than to make the wage system, in all its forms, an impossibility, and to render Communism, which is the negation of wage-slavery, the only possible solution.

For even admitting that the Collectivist modification of the present system is possible, if introduced gradually during a period of prosperity and peace — though for my part I question its practicability even under such conditions — it would become impossible in a period of Revolution, when the need of feeding hungry millions springs up with the first call to arms. A political revolution can be accomplished without shaking the foundations of industry, but a revolution where the people lay hands upon property will inevitably paralyse exchange and production. Millions of public money would not suffice for wages to the millions of out-of-works.

This point cannot be too much insisted upon; the reorganization of industry on a new basis (and we shall presently show how tremendous this problem is) cannot be accomplished in a few days, nor, on the other hand, will the people submit to be half starved for years in order to oblige the theorists who uphold the wage system. To tide over the period of stress they will demand what they have always demanded in such cases — communization of supplies — the giving of rations.

It will be in vain to preach patience. The people will be patient no longer, and if food is not put in common they will plunder the bakeries.

If the people are not strong enough to carry all before them, they will be shot down to give Collectivism a fair field for experiment. To this end “order” must be maintained at any price — order, discipline, obedience! And as the capitalists will soon realize that when the people are shot down by those who call themselves Revolutionists, the Revolution itself will become hateful in the eyes of the masses; they will certainly lend their support to the champions of order — even though they are collectivists. In such a line of conduct, the capitalists will see a means of hereafter crushing the collectivists in their turn. If “order is established” in this fashion, the consequences are easy to foresee. Not content with shooting down the “marauders,” the faction of “order” will search out the “ringleaders of the mob.” They will set up again the law courts and reinstate the hangman. The most ardent revolutionists will be sent to the scaffold. It will be 1793 over again.

Do not let us forget how reaction triumphed in the last century. First the “Hébertists,” “the madmen,” were guillotined — those whom Mignet, with the memory of the struggle fresh upon him, still called “Anarchists.” The Dantonists soon followed them; and when the party of Robespierre had guillotined these revolutionaries, they in their turn had to mount the scaffold; whereupon the people, sick of bloodshed, and seeing the revolution lost, threw up the sponge, and let the reactionaries do their worst.

If “order is restored,” we say, the social democrats will hang the anarchists; the Fabians will hang the social democrats, and will in their turn be hanged by the reactionaries; and the Revolution will come to an end.

But everything confirms us in the belief that the energy of the people will carry them far enough, and that, when the Revolution takes place, the idea of anarchist Communism will have gained ground. It is not an artificial idea. The people themselves have breathed it in our ear, and the number of communists is ever increasing, as the impossibility of any other solution becomes more and more evident.

And if the impetus of the people is strong enough, affairs will take a very different turn. Instead of plundering the bakers’ shops one day, and starving the next, the people of the insurgent cities will take possession of the warehouses, the cattle markets, — in fact of all the provision stores and of all the food to be had. The well-intentioned citizens, men and women both, will form themselves into bands of volunteers and address themselves to the task of making a rough general inventory of the contents, of each shop and warehouse. In twenty-four hours the revolted town or district will know what Paris has not found out yet, in spite of its statistical committees, and what it never did find out during the siege — the quantity of provisions it contains. In forty-eight hours millions of copies will be printed of the tables giving a sufficiently exact account of the available food, the places where it is stored, and the means of distribution.

In every block of houses, in every street, in every town ward, bands of volunteers will have been organized. These commissariat volunteers will work in unison and keep in touch with each other. If only the Jacobin bayonets do not get in the way; if only the self-styled “scientific” theorists do not thrust themselves in to darken counsel! Or rather let then expound their muddle-headed theories as much as they like, provided they have no authority, no power! And that admirable spirit of organization inherent in the people, above all in every social grade of the French nation,[4] but which they have so seldom been allowed to exercise, will initiate, even in so huge a city as Paris, and in the midst of a Revolution, an immense guild of free workers, ready to furnish to each and all the necessary food.

Give the people a free hand, and in ten days the food service will be conducted with admirable regularity. Only those who have never seen the people hard at work, only those who have passed their lives buried among documents, can doubt it. Speak of the organizing genius of the “Great Misunderstood,” the people, to those who have seen it in Paris in the days of the barricades, or in London during the great dockers strike, when half a million of starving folk had to be fed, and they will tell you how superior it is to the official ineptness of Bumbledom.

And even supposing we had to endure a certain amount of discomfort and confusion for a fortnight or a month, surely that would not matter very much. For the mass of the people it would still be an improvement on their former condition; and, besides, in times of Revolution one can dine contentedly enough on a bit of bread and cheese while eagerly discussing events.

In any case, a system which springs up spontaneously, under stress of immediate need, will be infinitely preferable to anything invented between four walls by hide-bound theorists sitting on any number of committees.
IV

The people of the great towns will be driven by force of circumstances to take possession of all the provisions, beginning with the barest necessaries, and gradually extending Communism to other things, in order to satisfy the needs of all the citizens.

The sooner it is done the better; the sooner it is done the less misery there will be and the less strife.

But upon what basis must society be organized in order that all may share and share alike? This is the question that meets us at the outset.

We answer that there are no two ways of it. There is only one way in which Communism can be established equitably, only one way which satisfies our instincts of justice and is at the same time practical, namely, the system already adopted by the agrarian communes of Europe.

Take for example a peasant commune, no matter where, even in France, where the Jacobins have, done their best to destroy all communal usage. If the commune possesses woods and copses, then, so long as there is plenty of wood for all, every one can take as much as he wants, without other let or hindrance than the public opinion of his neighbours. As to the timber-trees, which are always scarce, they have to be carefully apportioned.

The same with the communal pasture land; while there is enough and to spare, no limit is put to what the cattle of each homestead may consume, nor to the number of beasts grazing upon the pastures. Grazing grounds are not divided, nor is fodder doled out, unless there is scarcity. All the Swiss communes, and many of those in France and Germany too, wherever there is communal pasture land, practice this system.

And in the countries of Eastern Europe, where there are great forests and no scarcity of land, you find the peasants felling the trees as they need them, and cultivating as much of the soil as they require, without any thought of limiting each man’s share of timber or of land. But the timber will be divided, and the land parcelled out, to each household according to its needs, as soon as either becomes scarce, as is already the case in Russia.

In a word, the system is this: no stint or limit to what the community possesses in abundance, but equal sharing and dividing of those commodities which are scarce or apt to run short. Of the three hundred and fifty millions who inhabit Europe, two hundred millions still follow this system of natural Communism.

It is a fact worth remarking that the same system prevails in the great towns in the distribution of one commodity at least, which is found in abundance, the water supplied to each house.

As long as there is no fear of the supply running short, no water company thinks of checking the consumption of water in each house. Take what you please! But during the great droughts, if there is any fear of supply failing, the water companies know that all they have to do is to make known the fact, by means of a short advertisement in the papers, and the citizens will reduce their consumption of water and not let it run to waste.

But if water were actually scarce, what would be done? Recourse would be had to a system of rations. Such a measure is so natural, so inherent in common sense, that Paris twice asked to be put on rations during the two sieges which it underwent in 1871.

Is it necessary to go into details, to prepare tables showing how the distribution of rations may work, to prove that it is just and equitable, infinitely more just and equitable than the existing state of things? All these tables and details will not serve to convince those of the middle classes, nor, alas, those of the workers tainted with middle-class prejudices, who regard the people as a mob of savages ready to fall upon and devour each other, directly the Government ceases to direct affairs. But those only who have never seen the people resolve and act on their own initiative could doubt for a moment that if the masses were masters of the situation, they would distribute rations to each and all in strictest accordance with justice and equity.

If you were to give utterance, in any gathering of people, to the opinion that delicacies — game and such-like — should be reserved for the fastidious palates of aristocratic idlers, and black bread given to the sick in the hospitals, you would be hissed. But say at the same gathering, preach at the street corners and in the market places, that the most tempting delicacies ought to be kept for the sick and feeble — especially for the sick. Say that if there are only five brace of partridge in the entire city, and only one case of sherry wine, they should go to sick people and convalescents. Say that after the sick come the children. For them the milk of the cows and goats should be reserved if there is not enough for all. To the children and the aged the last piece of meat, and to the strong man dry bread, if the community be reduced to that extremity.

Say, in a word, that if this or that article of consumption runs short, and has to be doled out, to those who have most need most should be given. Say that and see if you do not meet with universal agreement.

The man who is full-fed does not understand this, but the people do understand, have always understood it; and even the child of luxury, if he is thrown on the street and comes into contact with the masses, even he will learn to understand.

The theorists — for whom the soldier’s uniform and the barrack mess table are civilization’s last word — would like no doubt to start a regime of National Kitchens and “Spartan Broth.” They would point out the advantages thereby gained, the economy in fuel and food, if such huge kitchens were established, where every one could come for their rations of soup and bread and vegetables.

We do not question these advantages. We are well aware that important economies have already been achieved in this direction — as, for instance, when the handmill, or quern, and the baker’s oven attached to each house were abandoned. We can see perfectly well that it would be more economical to cook broth for a hundred families at once, instead of lighting a hundred separate fires. We know, besides, that there are a thousand ways of doing up potatoes, but that cooked in one huge pot for a hundred families they would be just as good.

We know, in fact, that variety in cooking being a matter of the seasoning introduced by each cook or housewife, the cooking together of a hundred weight of potatoes would not prevent each cook or housewife from dressing and serving them in any way she pleased. And we know that stock made from meat can be converted into a hundred different soups to suit a hundred different tastes.

But though we are quite aware of all these facts, we still maintain that no one has a right to force the housewife to take her potatoes from the communal kitchen ready cooked if she prefers to cook them herself in her own pot on her own fire. And, above all, we should wish each one to be free to take his meals with his family, or with his friends, or even in a restaurant, if so it seemed good to him.

Naturally large public kitchens will spring up to take the place of the restaurants, where people are poisoned nowadays. Already the Parisian housewife gets the stock for her soup from the butcher and transforms it into whatever soup she likes, and London housekeepers know that they can have a joint roasted, or an apple or rhubarb tart baked at the baker’s for a trifling sum, thus economizing time and fuel. And when the communal kitchen — the common bakehouse of the future — is established, and people can get their food cooked without the risk of being cheated or poisoned, the custom will no doubt become general of going to the communal kitchen for the fundamental parts of the meal, leaving the last touches to be added as individual taste shall suggest.

But to make a hard and fast rule of this, to make a duty of taking home our food ready cooked, that would be as repugnant to our modern minds as the ideas of the convent or the barrack — morbid ideas born in brains warped by tyranny or superstition.

Who will have a right to the food of the commune? will assuredly be the first question which we shall have to ask ourselves. Every township will answer for itself, and we are convinced that the answers will all be dictated by the sentiment of justice. Until labour is reorganized, as long as the disturbed period lasts, and while it is impossible to distinguish between inveterate idlers and genuine workers thrown out of work, the available food ought to be shared by all without exception. Those who have been enemies to the new order will hasten of their own accord to rid the commune of their presence. But it seems to us that the masses of the people, which have always been magnanimous, and have nothing of vindictiveness in their disposition, will be ready to share their bread with all who remain with them, conquered and conquerors alike. It will be no loss to the Revolution to be inspired by such an idea, and, when work is set agoing again, the antagonists of yesterday will stand side by side in the same workshops. A society where work is free will have nothing to fear from idlers.

“But provisions will run short in a month!” our critics at once exclaim.

“So much the better,” say we. It will prove that for the first time on record the people have had enough to eat. As to the question of obtaining fresh supplies, we shall discuss the means in our next chapter.
V

By what means could a city in a state of revolution be supplied with food? We shall answer this question, but it is obvious that the means resorted to will depend on the character of the Revolution in the provinces, and in neighbouring countries. If the entire nation, or, better still, if all Europe should accomplish the Social Revolution simultaneously, and start with thorough-going Communism, our procedure would be simplified; but if only a few communities in Europe make the attempt, other means will have to be chosen. The circumstances will dictate the measures.

We are thus led, before we proceed further, to glance at the state of Europe, and, without pretending to prophesy, we may try to foresee what course the Revolution will take, or at least what will be its essential features.

Certainly it would be very desirable that all Europe should rise at once, that expropriation should be general, and that communistic principles should inspire all and sundry. Such a universal rising would do much to simplify the task of our century.

But all the signs lead us to believe that it will not take place. That the Revolution will embrace Europe we do not doubt. If one of the four great continental capitals — Paris, Vienna, Brussels, or Berlin — rises in revolution and overturns its Government, it is almost certain that the three others will follow its example within a few weeks’ time. It is, moreover, highly probable that the Peninsulas and even London and St. Petersburg would not be long in following suit. But whether the Revolution would everywhere exhibit the same characteristics is doubtful.

Though it is more than probable that expropriation will be everywhere carried into effect on a larger or smaller scale, and that this policy carried out by any one of the great nations of Europe will influence all the rest; yet the beginnings of the Revolution will exhibit great local differences, and its course will vary in different countries. In 1789–93, the French peasantry took four years to finally rid themselves of the redemption of feudal rights, and the bourgeois to overthrow royalty. Let us keep that in mind, therefore, and be prepared to see the Revolution develop itself somewhat gradually. Let us not be disheartened if here and there its steps should move less rapidly. Whether it would take an avowedly socialist character in all European nations, at any rate at the beginning, is doubtful. Germany, be it remembered, is still realizing its dream of a United Empire. Its advanced parties see visions of a Jacobin Republic like that of 1848, and of the organization of labour according to Louis Blanc; while the French people, on the other hand, want above all things a free Commune, whether it be a communist Commune or not.

There is every reason to believe that, when the coming Revolution takes place, Germany will go further than France went in 1793. The eighteenth century Revolution in France was an advance on the English Revolution of the seventeenth, abolishing as it did at one stroke the power of the throne and the landed aristocracy, whose influence still survives in England. But, if Germany goes further and does greater things than France did in 1793, there can be no doubt that the ideas which will foster the birth of her Revolution will be those of 1848, as the ideas which will inspire the Revolution in Russia will be those of 1789, modified somewhat by the intellectual movements of our own century.

Without, however, attaching to these forecast a greater importance than they merit, we may safely conclude this much: the Revolution will take a different character in each of the different European nations; the point attained in the socialization of wealth will not be everywhere the same.

Will it therefore be necessary, as is sometimes suggested, that the nations in the vanguard of the movement should adapt their pace to those who lag behind? Must we wait till the Communist Revolution is ripe in all civilized countries? Clearly not! Even if it were a thing to be desired it is not possible. History does not wait for the laggards.

Besides, we do not believe that in any one country the Revolution will be accomplished at a stroke, in the twinkling of an eye, as some socialists dream. It is highly probable that if one of the five or six large towns of France — Paris, Lyons, Marseilles, Lille, Saint-Etienne, Bordeaux — were to proclaim the Commune, the others would follow its example, and that many, smaller towns would do the same. Probably also various mining districts and industrial centres would hasten to rid themselves of “owners” and “masters,” and form themselves into free groups.

But many country places have not advanced to that point. Side by side with the revolutionized communes such places would remain in an expectant attitude, and would go on living on the Individualist system. Undisturbed by visits of the bailiff or the tax-collector, the peasants would not be hostile to the revolutionaries, and thus, while profiting by the new state of affairs they would defer the settlement of accounts with the local exploiters: But with that practical enthusiasm which always characterizes agrarian uprisings (witness the passionate toil of 1792) they would throw themselves into the task of cultivating the land, which, freed from taxes and mortgages, would become so much dearer to them.

As to abroad, revolution would break out every where, but revolution under divers aspects, in one country State Socialism, in another Federation; everywhere more or less Socialism, not conforming to any particular rule.
VI

Let us now return to our city in revolt, and consider how its citizens can provide foodstuffs for themselves. How are the necessary provisions to be obtained if the nation as a whole has not accepted Communism? This is the question to be solved. Take, for example, one of the large French towns — take the capital itself, for that matter. Paris consumes every year thousands of tons of grain, 350,000 head of oxen, 200,000 calves, 300,000 swine, and more than two millions of sheep, besides great quantities of game. This huge city devours, besides, 18 million pounds of butter, 172 million eggs, and other produce in like proportion.

It imports flour and grain from the United States and from Russia, Hungary, Italy, Egypt, and the Indies; live stock from Germany, Italy, Spain — even Roumania and Russia; and as for groceries, there is not a country in the world that it does not lay under contribution. Now, let us see how Paris or any other great town could be revictualled by home-grown produce, supplies of which could be readily and willingly sent in from the provinces.

To those who put their trust in “authority” the question will appear quite simple. They would begin by establishing a strongly centralized Government, furnished with all the machinery of coercion — the police, the army, the guillotine. This Government would draw up a statement of all the produce contained in France. It would divide the country into districts of supply, and then command that a prescribed quantity of some particular foodstuff be sent to such a place on such a day, and delivered at such a station, to be there received on a given day by a specified official and stored in particular warehouses.

Now, we declare with the fullest conviction, not merely that such a solution is undesirable, but that it never could by any possibility be put into practice. It is wildly Utopian!

Pen in hand, one may dream such a dream in the study, but in contact with reality it comes to nothing; for, like all such theories, it leaves out of account the spirit of independence that is in man. The attempt would lead to a universal uprising, to three or four Vendées, to the villages rising against the towns, all the country up in arms defying the city for its arrogance in attempting to impose such a system upon the country.

We have already had too much of Jacobin Utopias! Let us see if some other form of organization will meet the case.

In 1793 the provinces starved the large towns, and killed the Revolution. And yet it is a known fact that the production of grain in France during 1792–93 had not diminished; indeed the evidence goes to show that it had increased. But after having taken possession of the manorial lands, after having reaped a harvest from them, the peasants would not part with their grain for paper-money. They withheld their produce, waiting for a rise in the price, or the introduction of gold. The most rigorous measures of the National Convention were without avail, and even the fear of death failed to break up the ring, or force its members to sell their corn. For it is matter of history that the commissaries of the Convention did not scruple to guillotine those who withheld their grain from the market, and pitilessly executed those who speculated in foodstuffs. All the same, the corn was not forthcoming, and the townsfolk suffered from famine.

But what was offered to the husbandman in exchange for his hard toil? Assignats, scraps of paper decreasing in value every day, promises of payment, which could not be kept. A forty-pound note would not purchase a pair of boots, and the peasant, very naturally, was not anxious to barter a year’s toil for a piece of paper with which he could not even buy a shirt.

As long as worthless paper money — whether called assignats or labour notes — is offered to the peasant-producer it will always be the same. The country will withhold its produce, and the towns will suffer want, even if the recalcitrant peasants are guillotined as before.

We must offer to the peasant in exchange for his toil not worthless paper money, but the manufactured articles of which he stands in immediate need. He lacks the proper implements to till the land, clothes to protect him properly from the inclemencies of the weather, lamps and oil to replace his miserable rushlight or tallow dip, spades, rakes, ploughs. All these things, under present conditions, the peasant is forced to do without, not because he does not feel the need of them, but because, in his life of struggle and privation, a thousand useful things are beyond his reach; because he has no money to buy them.

Let the town apply itself, without loss of time, to manufacturing all that the peasant needs, instead of fashioning gewgaws for the wives of rich citizens. Let the sewing machines of Paris be set to work on clothes for the country-folk: workaday clothes and clothes for Sunday too, instead of costly evening dresses. Let the factories and foundries turn out agricultural implements, spades, rakes, and such-like, instead of waiting till the English send them to France, in exchange for French wines!

Let the towns send no more inspectors to the villages, wearing red, blue, or rainbow-coloured scarves, to convey to the peasant orders to take his produce to this place or that, but let them send friendly embassies to the country-folk and bid them in brotherly fashion: “Bring us your produce, and take from our stores and shops all the manufactured articles you please.” Then provisions would pour in on every side. The peasant would only withhold what he needed for his own use, and would send the rest into the cities, feeling for the first time in the course of history that these toiling townsfolk were his comrades — his brethren, and not his exploiters.

We shall be told, perhaps, that this would necessitate a complete transformation of industry. Well, yes, that is true of certain departments; but there are other branches which could be rapidly modified in such a way as to furnish the peasant with clothes, watches, furniture, and the simple implements for which the towns make him pay such exorbitant prices at the present time. Weavers, tailors, shoemakers, tinsmiths, cabinet-makers, and many other trades and crafts could easily direct their energies to the manufacture of useful and necessary articles, and abstain from producing mere luxuries. All that is needed is that the public mind should be thoroughly convinced of the necessity of this transformation, and should come to look upon it as an act of justice and of progress, and that it should no longer allow itself to be cheated by that dream, so dear to the theorists — the dream of a revolution which confines itself to taking possession of the profits of industry, and leaves production and commerce just as they are now.

This, then, is our view of the whole question. Cheat the peasant no longer with scraps of paper — be the sums inscribed upon them ever so large; but offer him in exchange for his produce the very things of which he, the tiller of the soil, stands in need. Then the fruits of the land will be poured into the towns. If this is not done there will be famine in our cities, and reaction and despair will follow in its train.
VII

All the great towns, we have said, buy their grain, their flour, and their meat, not only from the provinces, but also from abroad. Foreign countries send Paris spices, fish, and various dainties, besides immense quantities of corn and meat.

But when the Revolution comes we must depend on foreign countries as little as possible. If Russian wheat, Italian or Indian rice, and Spanish or Hungarian wines abound in the markets of western Europe, it is not that the countries which export them have a superabundance, or that such a produce grows there of itself, like the dandelion in the meadows. In Russia, for instance, the peasant works sixteen hours a day, and half starves from three to six months every year, in order to export the grain with which he pays the landlord and the State. To-day the police appears in the Russian village as soon as the harvest is gathered in, and sells the peasant’s last horse and last cow for arrears of taxes and rent due to the landlord, unless the victim immolates himself of his own accord by selling the grain to the exporters. Usually, rather than part with his live stock at a disadvantage, he keeps only a nine months’ supply of grain, and sells the rest. Then, in order to sustain life until the next harvest, he mixes birch-bark and tares with his flour for three months, if it has been a good year, and for six if it has been bad, while in London they are eating biscuits made of his wheat.

But as soon as the Revolution comes, the Russian peasant will keep bread enough for himself and his children; the Italian and Hungarian peasants will do the same; and the Hindoo, let us hope, will profit by these good examples; and the farmers of America will hardly be able to cover all the deficit in grain which Europe will experience. So it will not do to count on their contributions of wheat and maize satisfying all the wants.

Since all our middle-class civilization is based on the exploitation of inferior races and countries with less advanced industrial systems, the Revolution will confer a boon at the very outset, by menacing that “civilization,” and allowing the so-called inferior races to free themselves.

But this great benefit will manifest itself by a steady and marked diminution of the food supplies pouring into the great cities of western Europe.

It is difficult to predict the course of affairs in the provinces. On the one hand the slave of the soil will take advantage of the Revolution to straighten his bowed back. Instead of working fourteen or fifteen hours a day, as he does at present, he will be at liberty to work only half that time, which of course would have the effect of decreasing the production of the principal articles of consumption — grain and meat.

But, on the other hand, there will be an increase of production as soon as the peasant realizes that he is no longer forced to support the idle rich by his toil. New tracts of land will be cleared, new and improved machines set a-going.

“Never was the land so energetically cultivated as in 1792, when the peasant had taken back from the landlord the soil which he had coveted so long,” Michelet tells us, speaking of the Great Revolution.

Before long, intensive culture would be within the reach of all. Improved machinery, chemical manures, and all such matters would be common property. But everything tends to indicate that at the outset there would be a falling off in agricultural products, in France as elsewhere.

In any case it would be wisest to count upon such a falling off of contributions from the provinces as well as from abroad.

And how is this falling off to be made good? Why, in heaven’s name, by setting to work ourselves! No need to rack our brains for far-fetched panaceas when the remedy lies close at hand!

The large towns must undertake to till the soil, like the country districts. We must return to what biology calls “the integration of functions” — after the division of labour the taking up of it as a whole — this is the course followed throughout Nature.

Besides, philosophy apart, the force of circumstances would bring about this result. Let Paris see that at the end of eight months it will be running short of bread, and Paris will set to work to grow wheat.

“What about land?” It will not be wanting, for it is round the great towns, and round Paris especially, that the parks and pleasure grounds of the landed gentry are to be found. These thousands of acres only await the skilled labour of the husbandman to surround Paris with fields infinitely more fertile and productive than the steppes of southern Russia, where the soil is dried up by the sun. Nor will labour be lacking. To what should the two million citizens of Paris turn their attention when they would be no longer catering for the luxurious fads and amusements of Russian princes, Roumanian grandees, and wives of Berlin financiers?

With all the mechanical inventions of the century; with all the intelligence and technical skill of the worker accustomed to deal with complicated machinery; with inventors, chemists, professors of botany, practical botanists like the market gardeners of Gennevilliers; with all the plant that they could use for multiplying and improving machinery, and, finally, with the organizing spirit of the Parisian people, their pluck and energy — with all these at its command, the agriculture of the anarchist Commune of Paris would be a very different thing from the rude husbandry of the Ardennes.

Steam, electricity, the heat of the sun, and the breath of the wind, will ere long be pressed into service. The steam harrow and the steam plough will quickly do the rough work of preparation, and the soil, thus cleaned and enriched, will only need the intelligent care of man, and of woman even more than man, to be clothed with luxuriant vegetation — not once but three or four times in the year.

Thus, learning the art of horticulture from experts, and trying experiments in different methods on small patches of soil reserved for the purpose, vying with each other to obtain the best returns, finding in physical exercise, without exhaustion or overwork, the health and strength which so often flags in cities, — men, women, and children will gladly turn to the labour of the fields, when it is no longer a slavish drudgery, but has become pleasure, a festival, a renewal of health and joy.

“There are no barren lands; the earth is worth what man is worth” — that is the last word of modern agriculture. Ask of the earth and she will give you bread, provided that you ask aright.

A district, though it were as small as the departments of the Seine and the Seine-et-Oise, and with so great a city as Paris to feed, would be practically sufficient to grow upon it all the food supplies, which otherwise might fail to reach it.

The combination of agriculture and industry, the husbandman and the mechanic in the same individual — this is what anarchist communism will inevitably lead us to, if it starts fair with expropriation.

Let the Revolution only get so far, and famine is not the enemy it will have to fear. No, the danger which will menace it lies in timidity, prejudice, and half-measures. The danger is where Danton saw it when he cried to France: “Dare, dare, and yet again, dare!” The bold thought first, and the bold deed will not fail to follow.
Chapter 6: Dwellings
I

Those who have closely watched the growth of certain ideas among the workers must have noticed that on one momentous question — the housing of the people, namely — a definite conclusion is being imperceptibly arrived at. It is a known fact that in the large towns of France, and in many of the smaller ones also, the workers are coming gradually to the conclusion that dwelling-houses are in no sense the property of those whom the State recognizes as their owners.

This idea has evolved naturally in the minds of the people, and nothing will ever convince them again that the “rights of property” ought to extend to houses.

The house was not built by its owner. It was erected, decorated, and furnished by innumerable workers — in the timber yard, the brick field, and the workshop, toiling for dear life at a minimum wage.

The money spent by the owner was not the product of his own toil. It was amassed, like all other riches, by paying the workers two-thirds or only a half of what was their due.

Moreover — and it is here that the enormity of the whole proceeding becomes most glaring — the house owes its actual value to the profit which the owner can make out of it. Now, this profit results from the fact that his house is built in a town possessing bridges, quays, and fine public buildings, and affording to its inhabitants a thousand comforts and conveniences unknown in villages; a town well paved, lighted with gas, in regular communication with other towns, and itself a centre of industry, commerce, science, and art; a town which the work of twenty or thirty generations has gone to render habitable, healthy, and beautiful.

A house in certain parts of Paris may be valued at thousands of pounds sterling, not because thousands of pounds’ worth of labour have been expended on that particular house, but because it is in Paris; because for centuries workmen, artists, thinkers, and men of learning and letters have contributed to make Paris what it is to-day — a centre of industry, commerce, politics, art, and science; because Paris has a past; because, thanks to literature, the names of its streets are household words in foreign countries as well as at home; because it is the fruit of eighteen centuries of toil, the work of fifty generations of the whole French nation.

Who, then, can appropriate to himself the tiniest plot of ground, or the meanest building, without committing a flagrant injustice? Who, then, has the right to sell to any bidder the smallest portion of the common heritage?

On that point, as we have said, the workers are agreed. The idea of free dwellings showed its existence very plainly during the siege of Paris, when the cry was for an abatement pure and simple of the terms demanded by the landlords. It appeared again during the Commune of 1871, when the Paris workmen expected the Communal Council to decide boldly on the abolition of rent. And when the New Revolution comes, it will be the first question with which the poor will concern themselves.

Whether in time of revolution or in time of peace, the worker must be housed somehow or other; he must have some sort of roof over his head. But, however tumble-down and squalid your dwelling may be, there is always a landlord who can evict you. True, during the Revolution he cannot find bailiffs and police-serjeants to throw your rags and chattels into the street, but who knows what the new Government will do to-morrow? Who can say that it will not call in the aid of force again, and set the police pack upon you to hound you out of your hovels? We have seen the Commune proclaim the remission of rents due up to the first of April only![5] After that rent had to be paid, though Paris was in a state of chaos, and industry at a standstill; so that the revolutionist had absolutely nothing to depend upon but his allowance of fifteen pence a day!

Now the worker must be made to see clearly that in refusing to pay rent to a landlord or owner he is not simply profiting by the disorganization of authority. He must understand that the abolition of rent is a recognized principle, sanctioned, so to speak, by popular assent; that to be housed rent-free is a right proclaimed aloud by the people.

Are we going to wait till this measure, which is in harmony with every honest man’s sense of justice, is taken up by the few socialists scattered among the middle-class elements, of which the Provisionary Government will be composed? We should have to wait long — till the return of reaction, in fact!

This is why, refusing uniforms and badges — those outward signs of authority and servitude — and remaining people among the people, the earnest revolutionists will work side by side with the masses, that the abolition of rent, the expropriation of houses, may become an accomplished fact. They will prepare the ground and encourage ideas to grow in this direction; and when the fruit of their labours is ripe, the people will proceed to expropriate the houses without giving heed to the theories which will certainly be thrust in their way — theories about paying compensation to landlords, and finding first the necessary funds.

On the day that the expropriation of houses takes place, on that day, the exploited workers will have realized that the new times have come, that Labour will no longer have to bear the yoke of the rich and powerful, that Equality has been openly proclaimed, that this Revolution is a real fact, and not a theatrical make-believe, like so many others preceding it.
II

If the idea of expropriation be adopted by the people it will be carried into effect in spite of all the “insurmountable” obstacles with which we are menaced.

Of course, the good folk in new uniforms, seated in the official arm-chairs of the Hôtel de Ville, will be sure to busy themselves in heaping up obstacles. They will talk of giving compensation to the landlords, of preparing statistics, and drawing up long reports. Yes, they would be capable of drawing up reports long enough to outlast the hopes of the people, who, after waiting and starving in enforced idleness, and seeing nothing come of all these official researches, would lose heart and faith in the Revolution and abandon the field to the reactionaries. The new bureaucracy would end by making expropriation hateful in the eyes of all.

Here, indeed, is a rock which might shipwreck our hopes. But if the people turn a deaf ear to the specious arguments used to dazzle them, and realize that new life needs new conditions, and if they undertake the task themselves, then expropriation can be effected without any great difficulty.

“But how? How can it be done?” you ask us. We shall try to reply to this question, but with a reservation. We have no intention of tracing out the plans of expropriation in their smallest details. We know beforehand that all that any man, or group of men, could suggest to-day would be far surpassed by the reality when it comes. Man will accomplish greater things, and accomplish them better and by simpler methods than those dictated to him beforehand. Thus we are content to indicate the manner by which expropriation might be accomplished without the intervention of Government. We do not propose to go out of our way to answer those who declare that the thing is impossible. We confine ourselves to replying that we are not the upholders of any particular method of organization. We are only concerned to demonstrate that expropriation could be effected by popular initiative, and could not be effected by any other means whatever.

It seems very likely that, as soon as expropriation is fairly started, groups of volunteers will spring up in every district, street, and block of houses, and undertake to inquire into the number of flats and houses which are empty and of those which are overcrowded, the unwholesome slums and the houses which are too spacious for their occupants and might well be used to house those who are stifled in swarming tenements. In a few days these volunteers would have drawn up complete lists for the street and the district of all the flats, tenements, family mansions and villa residences, all the rooms and suites of rooms, healthy and unhealthy, small and large, foetid dens and homes of luxury.

Freely communicating with each other, these volunteers would soon have their statistics complete. False statistics can be manufactured in board rooms and offices, but true and exact statistics must begin with the individual and mount up from the simple to the complex.

Then, without waiting for any one’s leave, those citizens will probably go and find their comrades who were living in miserable garrets and hovels and will say to them simply: “It is a real Revolution this time, comrades, and no mistake about it. Come to such a place this evening; all the neighbourhood will be there; we are going to redistribute the dwelling-houses. If you are tired of your slum-garret, come and choose one of the flats of five rooms that are to be disposed of, and when you have once moved in you shall stay, never fear. The people are up in arms, and he who would venture to evict you will have to answer to them.”

“But every one will want a fine house or a spacious flat!” we are told. No, you are mistaken. It is not the people’s way to clamour for the moon. On the contrary, every time we have seen them set about repairing a wrong we have been struck by the good sense and instinct for justice which animates the masses. Have we ever known them demand the impossible? Have we ever seen the people of Paris fighting among themselves while waiting for their rations of bread or firewood during the two sieges? The patience and resignation which prevailed among them was constantly held up to admiration by the foreign press correspondents; and yet these patient waiters knew full well that the last comers would have to pass the day without food or fire.

We do not deny that there are plenty of egotistic instincts in isolated individuals in our societies. We are quite aware of it. But we contend that the very way to revive and nourish these instincts would be to confine such questions as the housing of the people to any board or committee, in fact, to the tender mercies of officialism in any shape or form. Then indeed all the evil passions spring up, and it becomes a case of who is the most influential person on the board. The least inequality causes wranglings and recriminations. If the smallest advantage is given to any one, a tremendous hue and cry is raised — and not without reason.

But if the people themselves, organized by streets, districts, and parishes, undertake to move the inhabitants of the slums into the half-empty dwellings of the middle classes, the trifling inconveniences, the little inequalities will be easily tided over. Rarely has appeal been made to the good instincts of the masses — only as a last resort, to save the sinking ship in times of revolution — but never has such an appeal been made in vain; the heroism, the self-devotion of the toiler has never failed to respond to it. And thus it will be in the coming Revolution.

But, when all is said and done, some inequalities, some inevitable injustices, will remain. There are individuals in our societies whom no great crisis can lift out of the deep ruts of egoism in which they are sunk. The question, however, is not whether there will be injustices or no, but rather how to limit the number of them.

Now all history, all the experience of the human race, and all social psychology, unite in showing that the best and fairest way is to trust the decision to those whom it concerns most nearly. It is they alone who can consider and allow for the hundred and one details which must necessarily be overlooked in any merely official redistribution.
III

Moreover, it is by no means necessary to make straightway an absolutely equal redistribution of all the dwellings. There will no doubt be some inconveniences at first, but matters will soon be righted in a society which has adopted expropriation.

When the masons, and carpenters, and all who are concerned in house building, know that their daily bread is secured to them, they will ask nothing better than to work at their old trades a few hours a day. They will adapt the fine houses which absorbed the time of a whole staff of servants, and in a few months homes will have sprung up, infinitely healthier and more conveniently arranged than those of to-day. And to those who are not yet comfortably housed the anarchist Commune will be able to say: “Patience, comrades! Palaces fairer and finer than any the capitalists built for themselves will spring from the ground of our enfranchised city. They will belong to those who have most need of them. The anarchist Commune does not build with an eye to revenues. These monuments erected to its citizens, products of the collective spirit, will serve as models to all humanity; they will be yours.”

If the people of the Revolution expropriate the houses and proclaim free lodgings — the communalizing of houses and the right of each family to a decent dwelling — then the Revolution will have assumed a communistic character from the first, and started on a course from which it will be by no means easy to turn it. It will have struck a fatal blow at individual property.

For the expropriation of dwellings contains in germ the whole social revolution. On the manner of its accomplishment depends the character of all that follows. Either we shall start on a good road leading straight to anarchist communism, or we shall remain sticking in the mud of despotic individualism.

It is easy to see the numerous objections — theoretic on the one hand, practical on the other — with which we are sure to be met. As it will be a question of maintaining iniquity at any price, our opponents will of course protest “in the name of justice.” “Is it not a crying shame,” they will exclaim, “that the people of Paris should take possession of all these fine houses, while the peasants in the country have only tumble-down huts to live in?” But do not let us make a mistake. These enthusiasts for justice forget, by a lapse of memory to which they are subject, the “crying shame” which they themselves are tacitly defending. They forget that in this same city the worker, with his wife and children, suffocates in a noisome garret, while from his window he sees the rich man’s palace. They forget that whole generations perish in crowded slums, starving for air and sunlight, and that to redress this injustice ought to be the first task of the Revolution.

Do not let these disingenuous protests hold us back. We know that any inequality which may exist between town and country in the early days of the Revolution will be transitory and of a nature to right itself from day to day; for the village will not fail to improve its dwellings as soon as the peasant has ceased to be the beast of burden of the farmer, the merchant, the money-lender, and the State. In order to avoid an accidental and transitory inequality, shall we stay our hand from righting an ancient wrong?

The so-called practical objections are not very formidable either. We are bidden to consider the hard case of some poor fellow who by dint of privation has contrived to buy a house just large enough to hold his family. And we are going to deprive him of his hard-earned happiness, to turn him into the street! Certainly not. If his house is only just large enough for his family, by all means let him stay there. Let him work in his little garden too; our “boys” will not hinder him — nay, they will lend him a helping hand if need be. But suppose he lets lodgings, suppose he has empty rooms in his house; then the people will make the lodger understand that he need not pay his former landlord any more rent. Stay where you are, but rent free. No more duns and collectors; Socialism has abolished all that!

Or again, suppose that the landlord has a score of rooms all to himself, and some poor woman lives near by with five children in one room. In that case the people would see whether, with some alterations, these empty rooms could not be converted into a suitable home for the poor woman and her five children. Would not that be more just and fair than to leave the mother and her five little ones languishing in a garret, while Sir Gorgeous Midas sat at his ease in an empty mansion? Besides, good Sir Gorgeous would probably hasten to do it of his own accord; his wife will be delighted to be freed from half her big, unwieldy house when there is no longer a staff of servants to keep it in order.

“So you are going to turn everything upside down.” say the defenders of law and order. “There will be no end to the evictions and removals. Would it not be better to start fresh by turning everybody out of doors and redistributing the houses by lot?” Thus our critics; but we are firmly persuaded that if no Government interferes in the matter, if all the changes are entrusted to those free groups which have sprung up to undertake the work, the evictions and removals will be less numerous than those which take place in one year under the present system, owing to the rapacity of landlords.

In the first place, there are in all large towns almost enough empty houses and flats to lodge all the inhabitants of the slums. As to the palaces and suites of fine apartments, many working people would not live in them if they could. One could not “keep up” such houses without a large staff of servants. Their occupants would soon find themselves forced to seek less luxurious dwellings. The fine ladies would find that palaces were not well adapted to self-help in the kitchen. Gradually people would shake down. There would be no need to conduct Dives to a garret at the bayonet’s point, or install Lazarus in Dives’s palace by the help of an armed escort. People would shake down amicably into the available dwellings with the least possible friction and disturbance. Have we not the example of the village communes redistributing fields and disturbing the owners of the allotments so little that one can only praise the intelligence and good sense of the methods they employ. Fewer fields change hands under the management of the Russian Commune than where personal property holds sway, and is for ever carrying its quarrels into courts of law. And are we to believe that the inhabitants of a great European city would be less intelligent and less capable of organization than Russian or Hindoo peasants?

Moreover, we must not blink the fact that every revolution means a certain disturbance to everyday life, and those who expect this tremendous lift out of the old grooves to be accomplished without so much as jarring the dishes on their dinner tables will find themselves mistaken. It is true that Governments can change without disturbing worthy citizens at dinner, but the crimes of society towards those who have nourished and supported it are not to be redressed by any such political sleight of parties.

Undoubtedly there will be a disturbance, but it must not be of pure destruction; it must be minimized. And again — it is impossible to lay too much stress on this maxim — it will be by addressing ourselves to the interested parties, and not to boards and committees, that we shall best succeed in reducing the sum of inconveniences for everybody.

The people commit blunder on blunder when they have to choose by ballot some hare-brained candidate who solicits the honour of representing them, and takes upon himself to know all, to do all, and to organize all. But when they take upon themselves to organize what they know, what touches them directly, they do it better than all the “talking-shops” put together. Is not the Paris Commune an instance in point? and the great dockers’ strike? and have we not constant evidence of this fact in every village commune?
Chapter 7: Clothing
I

When the houses have become the common heritage of the citizens, and when each man has his daily supply of food, another forward step will have to be taken. The question of clothing will of course demand consideration next, and again the only possible solution will be to take possession, in the name of the people, of all the shops and warehouses where clothing is sold or stored, and to throw open the doors to all, so that each can take what he needs. The communalization of clothing — the right of each to take what he needs from the communal stores, or to have it made for him at the tailors and outfitters — is a necessary corollary of the communalization of houses and food.

Obviously we shall not need for that to despoil all citizens of their coats, to put all the garments in a heap and draw lots for them, as our critics, with equal wit and ingenuity, suggest. Let him who has a coat keep it still — nay, if he have ten coats it is highly improbable that any one will want to deprive him of them, for most folk would prefer a new coat to one that has already graced the shoulders of some fat bourgeois; and there will be enough new garments and to spare, without having recourse to second-hand wardrobes.

If we were to take an inventory of all the clothes and stuff for clothing accumulated in the shops and stores of the large towns, we should find probably that in Paris, Lyons, Bordeaux, and Marseilles, there was enough to enable the commune to offer garments to all the citizens, of both sexes; and if all were not suited at once, the communal outfitters would soon make good these shortcomings. We know how rapidly our great tailoring and dressmaking establishments work nowadays, provided as they are with machinery specially adapted for production on a large scale.

“But every one will want a sable-lined coat or a velvet gown!” exclaim our adversaries.

Frankly, we do not believe it. Every woman does not dote on velvet, nor does every man dream of sable linings. Even now, if we were to ask each woman to choose her gown, we should find some to prefer a simple, practical garment to all the fantastic trimmings the fashionable world affects.

Tastes change with the times, and the fashion in vogue at the time of the Revolution will certainly make for simplicity. Societies, like individuals, have their hours of cowardice, but also their heroic moments; and though the society of to-day cuts a very poor figure sunk in the pursuit of narrow personal interests and second-rate ideas, it wears a different air when great crises come. It has its moments of greatness and enthusiasm. Men of generous nature will gain the power which to-day is in the hand of jobbers. Self-devotion will spring up, and noble deeds beget their like; even the egotists will be ashamed of hanging back, and will be drawn in spite of themselves to admire, if not to imitate, the generous and brave.

The great Revolution of 1793 abounds in examples of this kind, and it is ever during such times of spiritual revival — as natural to societies as to individuals — that the spring-tide of enthusiasm sweeps humanity onwards.

We do not wish to exaggerate the part played by such noble passions, nor is it upon them that we would found our ideal of society. But we are not asking too much if we expect their aid in tiding over the first and most difficult moments. We cannot hope that our daily life will be continuously inspired by such exalted enthusiasms, but we may expect their aid at the first, and that is all we need.

It is just to wash the earth clean, to sweep away the shards and refuse, accumulated by centuries of slavery and oppression, that the new anarchist society will have need of this wave of brotherly love. Later on it can exist without appealing to the spirit of self-sacrifice, because it will have eliminated oppression, and thus created a new world instinct with all the feelings of solidarity.

Besides, should the character of the Revolution be such as we have sketched here, the free initiative of individuals would find an extensive field of action in thwarting the efforts of the egotists. Groups would spring up in every street and quarter to undertake the charge of the clothing. They would make inventories of all that the city possessed, and would find out approximately what were the resources at their disposal. It is more than likely that in the matter of clothing the citizens would adopt the same principle as in the matter of provisions — that is to say, they would offer freely from the common store everything which was to be found in abundance, and dole out whatever was limited in quantity.

Not being able to offer to each man a sable-lined coat, and to every woman a velvet gown, society would probably distinguish between the superfluous and the necessary, and, provisionally, at least, class sable and velvet among the superfluities of life, ready to let time prove whether what is a luxury to-day may not become common to all to-morrow. While the necessary clothing would be guaranteed to each inhabitant of the anarchist city, it would be left to private activity to provide for the sick and feeble those things, provisionally considered as luxuries, and to procure for the less robust such special articles, as would not enter into the daily consumption of ordinary citizens.

“But,” it may be urged, “this grey uniformity means the end of everything beautiful in life and art.”

“Certainly not!” we reply; and we still base our opinion on what already exists. We propose to show presently how an Anarchist society could satisfy the most artistic tastes of its citizens without allowing them to amass the fortunes of millionaires.
Chapter 8: Ways and Means
I

If a society, a city, or a territory, were to guarantee the necessaries of life to its inhabitants (and we shall see how the conception of the necessaries of life can be so extended as to include luxuries), it would be compelled to take possession of what is absolutely needed for production; that is to say — land, machinery, factories, means of transport, etc. Capital in the hands of private owners would be expropriated and returned to the community.

The great harm done by bourgeois society, as we have already mentioned, is not only that capitalists seize a large share of the profits of each industrial and commercial enterprise, thus enabling them to live without working, but that all production has taken a wrong direction, as it is not carried on with a view to securing well-being to all. For this reason we condemn it.

Moreover, it is impossible to carry on mercantile production in everybody’s interest. To wish it would be to expect the capitalist to go beyond his province and to fulfill duties that he cannot fulfill without ceasing to be what he is — a private manufacturer seeking his own enrichment. Capitalist organization, based on the personal interest of each individual trader, has given all that could be expected of it to society — it has increased the productive force of work. The capitalist, profiting by the revolution effected in industry by steam, by the sudden development of chemistry and machinery, and by other inventions of our century, has endeavoured in his own interest to increase the yield of work, and in a great measure he has succeeded. But to attribute other duties to him would be unreasonable. For example, to expect that he should use this superior yield of work in the interest of society as a whole, would be to ask philanthropy and charity of him, and a capitalist enterprise cannot be based on charity.

It now remains for society to extend this greater productivity, which is limited to certain industries, and to apply it to the general good. But it is evident that to guarantee well-being to all, society must take back possession of all means of production.

Economists, as is their wont, will not fail to remind us of the comparative well-being of a certain category of young robust workmen, skilled in certain special branches of industry. It is always this minority that is pointed out to us with pride. But is this well-being, which is the exclusive right of a few, secure? To-morrow, maybe, negligence, improvidence, or the greed of their employers, will deprive these privileged men of their work, and they will pay for the period of comfort they have enjoyed with months and years of poverty or destitution. How many important industries — woven goods, iron, sugar, etc. — without mentioning short-lived trades, have we not seen decline or come to a standstill alternately on account of speculations, or in consequence of natural displacement of work, and lastly from the effects of competition due to capitalists them selves! If the chief weaving and mechanical industries had to pass through such a crisis as they have passed through in 1886, we hardly need mention the small trades, all of which come periodically to a standstill.

What, too, shall we say to the price which is paid for the relative well-being of certain categories of workmen? Unfortunately, it is paid for by the ruin of agriculture, the shameless exploitation of the peasants, the misery of the masses. In comparison with the feeble minority of workers who enjoy a certain comfort, how many millions of human beings live from hand to mouth, without a secure wage, ready to go wherever they are wanted; how many peasants work fourteen hours a day for a poor pittance! Capital depopulates the country, exploits the colonies and the countries where industries are but little developed, dooms the immense majority of workmen to remain without technical education, to remain mediocre even in their own trade.

This is not merely accidental, it is a necessity of the capitalist system. In order to remunerate certain classes of workmen, peasants must become the beasts of burden of society; the country must be deserted for the town; small trades must agglomerate in the foul suburbs of large cities, and manufacture a thousand things of little value for next to nothing, so as to bring the goods of the greater industries within reach of buyers with small salaries. That bad cloth may sell, garments are made for ill-paid workers by tailors who are satisfied with a starvation wage! Eastern lands in a backward state are exploited by the West, in order that, under the capitalist system, workers in a few privileged industries may obtain certain limited comforts of life.

The evil of the present system is therefore not that the “surplus-value” of production goes to the capitalist, as Rodbertus and Marx said, thus narrowing the Socialist conception and the general view of the capitalist system; the surplus-value itself is but a consequence of deeper causes. The evil lies in the possibility of a surplus-value existing, instead of a simple surplus not consumed by each generation; for, that a surplus-value should exist, means that men, women, and children are compelled by hunger to sell their labour for a small part of what this labour produces, and, above all, of what their labour is capable of producing. But this evil will last as long as the instruments of production belong to a few. As long as men are compelled to pay tribute to property holders for the right of cultivating land or putting machinery into action, and the property holder is free to produce what bids fair to bring him in the greatest profits, rather than the greatest amount of useful commodities — well-being can only be temporarily guaranteed to a very few, and is only to be bought by the poverty of a section of society. It is not sufficient to distribute the profits realized by a trade in equal parts, if at the same time thousands of other workers are exploited. It is a case of PRODUCING THE GREATEST AMOUNT OF GOODS NECESSARY TO THE WELL-BEING OF ALL, WITH THE LEAST POSSIBLE WASTE OF HUMAN ENERGY.

This cannot be the aim of a private owner; and this is why society as a whole, taking this view of production as its ideal, will be compelled to expropriate all that enhances well-being while producing wealth. It will have to take possession of land, factories, mines, means of communication, etc., and besides, it will have to study what products will promote general well-being, as well as the ways and means of production.
II

How many hours a day will man have to work to produce nourishing food, a comfortable home, and necessary clothing for his family? This question has often preoccupied Socialists, and they generally came to the conclusion that four or five hours a day would suffice, on condition, be it well understood, that all men work. At the end of last century, Benjamin Franklin fixed the limit at five hours; and if the need of comfort is greater now, the power of production has augmented too, and far more rapidly.

In speaking of agriculture further on, we shall see what the earth can be made to yield to man when he cultivates it scientifically, instead of throwing seed haphazard in a badly ploughed soil as he mostly does to-day. In the great farms of Western America, some of which cover 30 square miles, but have a poorer soil than the manured soil of civilized countries, only 10 to 15 English bushels per English acre are obtained; that is to say, half the yield of European farms or of American farms in Eastern States. And nevertheless, thanks to machines which enable 2 men to plough 4 English acres a day, 100 men can produce in a year all that is necessary to deliver the bread of 10,000 people at their homes during a whole year.

Thus it would suffice for a man to work under the same conditions for 30 hours, say 6 half-days of five hours each, to have bread for a whole year; and to work 30 half-days to guarantee the same to a family of 5 people.

We shall also prove by results obtained nowadays that if we had recourse to intensive agriculture, less than 6 half-days’ work could procure bread, meat, vegetables, and even luxurious fruit for a whole family.

And again, if we study the cost of workmen’s dwellings, built in large towns to-day, we can ascertain that to obtain, in a large English city, a detached little house, as they are built for workmen, from 1400 to 1800 half-days’ work of 5 hours would be sufficient. As a house of that kind lasts 50 years at least, it follows that 28 to 36 half-days’ work a year would provide well-furnished, healthy quarters, with all necessary comfort for a family. Whereas when hiring the same apartment from an employer, a workman pays 75 to 100 days’ work per year.

Mark that these figures represent the maximum of what a house costs in England to-day, being given the defective organization of our societies. In Belgium, workmen’s cities have been built far cheaper. Taking everything into consideration, we are justified in affirming that in a well-organized society 30 or 40 half-days’ work a year will suffice to guarantee a perfectly comfortable home.

There now remains clothing, the exact value of which is almost impossible to fix, because the profits realized by a swarm of middlemen cannot be estimated. Let us take cloth, for example, and add up all the deductions made by landowners, sheep owners, wool merchants, and all their intermediate agents, then by railway companies, mill-owners, weavers, dealers in ready-made clothes, sellers and commission agents, and you will get an idea of what is paid to a whole swarm of capitalists for each article of clothing. That is why it is perfectly impossible to say how many days’ work an overcoat that you pay £3 or £4 in a. large London shop represents.

What is certain is that with present machinery they no doubt manage to manufacture an incredible amount of goods.

A few examples will suffice. Thus in the United States, in 751 cotton mills (for spinning and weaving), 175,000 men and women produce 2,033,000,000 yards of cotton goods, besides a great quantity of thread. On the average, more than 12,000 yards of cotton goods alone are obtained by a 300 days’ work of 9½ hours each, say 40 yards of cotton in 10 hours. Admitting that a family needs 200 yards a year at most, this would be equivalent to 50 hours’ work, say 10 half-days of 5 hours each. And we should have thread besides; that is to say, cotton to sew with, and thread to weave cloth with, so as to manufacture woolen stuffs mixed with cotton.

As to the results obtained by weaving alone, the official statistics of the United States teach us that in 1870 if workmen worked 13 to 14 hours a day, they made 10,000 yards of white cotton goods in a year; thirteen years later (1886) they wove 30,000 yards by working only 55 hours a week.

Even in printed cotton goods they obtained, weaving and printing included, 32,000 yards in 2670 hours of work a year — say about 12 yards an hour. Thus to have your 200 yards of white and printed cotton goods 17 hours’ work a year would suffice. It is necessary to remark that raw material reaches these factories in about the same state as it comes from the fields, and that the transformations gone through by the piece before it is converted into goods are completed in the course of these 17 hours. But to buy these 200 yards from the tradesman, a well-paid workman must give at the very least 10 to 15 days’ work of 10 hours each, say 100 to 150 hours. find as to the English peasant, he would have to toil for a month, or a little more, to obtain this luxury. By this example we already see that by working 50 half-days per year in a well-organized society we could dress better than the lower middle classes do to-day.

But with all this we have only required 60 half-days’ work of 5 hours each to obtain the fruits of the earth, 40 for housing, and 50 for clothing, which only makes half a year’s work, as the year consists of 300 working-days if we deduct holidays.

There remain still 150 half-days’ work which could be made use of for other necessaries of life — wine, sugar, coffee, tea, furniture, transport, etc. etc.

It is evident that these calculations are only approximative, but they can also be proved in an other way. When we take into account how many, in the so-called civilized nations, produce nothing, how many work at harmful trades, doomed to disappear, and lastly, how many are only useless middlemen, we see that in each nation the number of real producers could be doubled. And if, instead of every 10 men, 20 were occupied in producing useful commodities, and if society took the trouble to economize human energy, those 20 people would only have to work 5 hours a day without production decreasing. And it would suffice to reduce the waste of human energy at the service of wealthy families, or of those administrations that have one official to every ten inhabitants, and to utilize those forces, to augment the productivity of the nation, to limit work to four or even to three hours, on condition that we should be satisfied with present production.

After studying all these facts together, we may arrive, then, at the following conclusion: Imagine a society, comprising a few million inhabitants, engaged in agriculture and a great variety of industries — Paris, for example, with the Department of Seine-et-Oise. Suppose that in this society all children learn to work with their hands as well as with their brains. Admit that all adults, save women, engaged in the education of their children, bind themselves to work 5 hours a day from the age of twenty or twenty-two to forty-five or fifty, and that they follow occupations they have chosen in any one branch of human work considered necessary. Such a society could in return guarantee well-being to all its members; that is to say, a more substantial well-being than that enjoyed to-day by the middle classes. And, moreover, each worker belonging to this society would have at his disposal at least 5 hours a day which he could devote to science, art, and individual needs which do not come under the category of necessities, but will probably do so later on, when man’s productivity will have augmented, and those objects will no longer appear luxurious or inaccessible.
Chapter 9: The Need For Luxury
I

Man, however, is not a being whose exclusive purpose in life is eating, drinking, and providing a shelter for himself. As soon as his material wants are satisfied, other needs, of an artistic character, will thrust themselves forward the more ardently. Aims of life vary with each and every individual; and the more society is civilized, the more will individuality be developed, and the more will desires be varied.

Even to-day we see men and women denying themselves necessaries to acquire mere trifles, to obtain some particular gratification, or some intellectual or material enjoyment. A Christian or an ascetic may disapprove of these desires for luxury; but it is precisely these trifles that break the monotony of existence and make it agreeable. Would life, with all its inevitable sorrows, be worth living, if besides daily work man could never obtain a single pleasure according to his individual tastes?

If we wish for a Social Revolution, it is no doubt in the first place to give bread to all; to transform this execrable society, in which we can every day see robust workmen dangling their arms for want of an employer who will exploit them; women and children wandering shelterless at night; whole families reduced to dry bread; men, women, and children dying for want of care and even for want of food. It is to put an end to these iniquities that we rebel.

But we expect more from the Revolution. We see that the worker compelled to struggle painfully for bare existence, is reduced to ignorance of these higher delights, the highest within man’s reach, of science, and especially of scientific discovery; of art, and especially of artistic creation. It is in order to obtain these joys for all, which are now reserved to a few; in order to give leisure and the possibility of developing intellectual capacities, that the social revolution must guarantee daily bread to all. After bread has been secured, leisure is the supreme aim.

No doubt, nowadays, when hundreds and thousands of human beings are in need of bread, coal, clothing, and shelter, luxury is a crime; to satisfy it the worker’s child must go without bread! But in a society in which all can eat sufficiently the needs which we consider luxuries to-day will be the more keenly felt. And as all men do not and cannot resemble one another (the variety of tastes and needs is the chief guarantee of human progress) there will always be, and it is desirable that there should always be, men and women whose desire will go beyond those of ordinary individuals in some particular direction.

Everybody does not need a telescope, because, even if learning were general, there are people who prefer examining things through a microscope to studying the starry heavens. Some like statues, some pictures. A particular individual has no other ambition than to possess an excellent piano, while another is pleased with an accordion. The tastes vary, but the artistic needs exist in all. In our present, poor capitalistic society, the man who has artistic needs cannot satisfy them unless he is heir to a large fortune, or by dint of hard work appropriates to himself an intellectual capital which will enable him to take up a liberal profession. Still he cherishes the hope of some day satisfying his tastes more or less, and for this reason he reproaches the idealist Communist societies with having the material life of each individual as their sole aim. — “In your communal stores you may perhaps have bread for all,” he says to us, “but you will not have beautiful pictures, optical instruments, luxurious furniture, artistic jewelry — in short, the many things that minister to the infinite variety of human tastes. And in this way you suppress the possibility of obtaining anything besides the bread and meat which the commune can offer to all, and the grey linen in which all your lady citizens will be dressed.”

These are the objections which all communist systems have to consider, and which the founders of new societies, established in American deserts, never understood. They believed that if the community could procure sufficient cloth to dress all its members, a music hall in which the “brothers” could strum a piece of music, or act a play from time to time, it was enough. They forgot that the feeling for art existed in the agriculturist as well as in the burgher, and, notwithstanding that the expression of artistic feeling varies according to the difference in culture, in the main it remains the same. In vain did the community guarantee the common necessaries of life, in vain did it suppress all education that would tend to develop individuality, in vain did it eliminate all reading save the Bible. Individual tastes broke forth, and caused general discontent; quarrels arose when somebody proposed to buy a piano or scientific instruments; and the elements of progress flagged. The society could only exist on condition that it crushed all individual feeling, all artistic tendency, and all development.

Will the anarchist Commune be impelled by the same direction? Evidently not, if it understands that while it produces all that is necessary to material life, it must also strive to satisfy all manifestations of the human mind.
II

We frankly confess that when we think of the abyss of poverty and suffering that surrounds us, when we hear the heartrending cry of the worker walking the streets begging for work, we are loth to discuss the question: How will men act in a society, whose members are properly fed, to satisfy certain individuals desirous of possessing a piece of Sèvres china or a velvet dress?

We are tempted to answer: Let us make sure of bread to begin with, we shall see to china and velvet later on.

But as we must recognize that man has other needs besides food, and as the strength of Anarchy lies precisely in that it understands all human faculties and all passions, and ignores none, we shall, in a few words, explain how man can contrive to satisfy all his intellectual and artistic needs.

We have already mentioned that by working 4 or 5 hours a day till the age of forty-five or fifty, man could easily produce all that is necessary to guarantee comfort to society.

But the day’s work of a man accustomed to toil does not consist of; hours; it is a 10 hours’ day for 300 days a year, and lasts all his life. Of course, when a man is harnessed to a machine, his health is soon undermined and his intelligence is blunted; but when man has the possibility of varying occupations, and especially of alternating manual with intellectual work, he can remain occupied without fatigue, and even with pleasure, for 10 or 12 hours a day. Consequently the man who will have done 4 or 5 hours of manual work necessary for his existence, will have before him 5 or 6 hours which he will seek to employ according to his tastes. And these 5 or 6 hours a day will fully enable him to procure for himself, if he associates with others, all he wishes for, in addition to the necessaries guaranteed to all.

He will discharge first his task in the field, the factory, and so on, which he owes to society as his contribution to the general production. And he will employ the second half of his day, his week, or his year, to satisfy his artistic or scientific needs, or his hobbies.

Thousands of societies will spring up to gratify every taste and every possible fancy.

Some, for example, will give their hours of leisure to literature. They will then form groups comprising authors, compositors, printers, engravers, draughtsmen, all pursuing a common aim — the propagation of ideas that are dear to them.

Nowadays an author knows that there is a beast of burden, the worker, to whom, for the sum of a few shillings a day, he can entrust the printing of his books; but he hardly cares to know what a printing office is like. If the compositor suffers from lead-poisoning, and if the child who sees to the machine dies of anæmia, are there not other poor wretches to replace them?

But when there will be no more starvelings ready to sell their work for a pittance, when the exploited worker of to-day will be educated and will have his own ideas to put down in black and white and to communicate to others, then the authors and scientific men will be compelled to combine among themselves and with the printers, in order to bring out their prose and their poetry.

So long as men consider fustian and manual labour as a mark of inferiority, it will appear amazing to them to see an author setting up his own book in type, for has he not a gymnasium or games by way of diversion? But when the opprobrium connected with manual labour has disappeared, when all will have to work with their hands, there being no one to do it for them, then the authors as well as their admirers will soon learn the art of handling composing-sticks and type; they will know the pleasure of coming together — all admirers of the work to be printed — to set up the type, to shape it into pages, to take it in its virginal purity from the press. These beautiful machines, instruments of torture to the child who attends on them from morn till night, will be a source of enjoyment for those who will make use of them in order to give voice to the thoughts of their favourite author.

Will literature lose by it? Will the poet be less a poet after having worked out of doors or helped with his hands to multiply his work? Will the novelist lose his knowledge of human nature after having rubbed shoulders with other men in the forest or the factory, in the laying out of a road or on a railway line? Can there be two answers to these questions?

Maybe some books will be less voluminous; but then, more will be said on fewer pages. Maybe fewer waste-sheets will be published; but the matter printed will be more attentively read and more appreciated. The book will appeal to a larger circle of better educated readers, who will be more competent to judge.

Moreover, the art of printing, that has so little progressed since Gutenberg, is still in its infancy. It takes two hours to compose in type what is written in ten minutes, but more expeditious methods of multiplying thought are being sought after and will be discovered.

What a pity every author does not have to take his share in the printing of his works! What progress printing would have already made! We should no longer be using the movable letters, as in the seventeenth century.
III

Is it a dream to conceive a society in which — all having become producers, all having received an education that enables them to cultivate science or art, and all having leisure to do so — men would combine to publish the works of their choice, by contributing each his share of manual work? We have already hundreds of learned, literary, and other societies; and these societies are nothing but voluntary groups of men, interested in certain branches of learning, and associated for the purpose of publishing their works. The authors who write for the periodicals of these societies are not paid, and the periodicals are not for sale; they are sent gratis to all quarters of the globe, to other societies, cultivating the same branches of learning. This member of the society may insert in its review a one-page note summarizing his observations; another may publish therein an extensive work, the results of long years of study; while others will confine themselves to consulting the review as a starting point for further research. It does not matter: all these authors and readers are associated for the production of works in which all of them take an interest.

It is true that a learned society, like the individual author, goes to a printing office where workmen are engaged to do the printing. Nowadays, those who belong to the learned societies despise manual labour; which indeed is carried on under very bad conditions; but a community which would give a generous philosophic and scientific education to all its members, would know how to organize manual labour in such a way that it would be the pride of humanity. Its learned societies would become associations of explorers, lovers of science, and workers — all knowing a manual trade and all interested in science.

If, for example, the society is studying geology, all will contribute to the exploration of the earth’s strata; each member will take his share in research, and ten thousand observers where we have now only a hundred, will do more in a year than we can do in twenty years. And when their works are to be published, ten thousand men and women, skilled in different trades, will be ready to draw maps, engrave designs, compose, and print the books. With gladness will they give their leisure — in summer to exploration in winter to indoor work And when their works appear, they will find not only a hundred, but ten thousand readers interested in their common work.

This is the direction in which progress is already moving. Even to-day, when England felt the need of a complete dictionary of the English language, the birth of a Littré, who would devote his life to this work, was not waited for. Volunteers were appealed to, and a thousand men offered their services, spontaneously and gratuitously, to ransack the libraries, to take notes, and to accomplish in a few years a work which one man could not complete in his lifetime. In all branches of human intelligence the same spirit is breaking forth, and we should have a very limited knowledge of humanity could we not guess that the future is announcing itself in such tentative co-operation, which is gradually taking the place of individual work.

For this dictionary to be a really collective work, it would have required that many volunteer authors, printers and printers’ readers should have worked in common; but something in this direction is done already in the Socialist Press, which offers us examples of manual and intellectual work combined. It happens in our newspapers that a Socialist author composes in lead his own article. True, such attempts are rare, but they indicate in which direction evolution is going.

They show the road of liberty. In future, when a man will have something useful to say-a word that goes beyond the thoughts of his century, he will not have to look for an editor who might advance the necessary capital. He will look for collaborators among those who know the printing trade, and who approve the idea of his new work. Together they will publish the new book or journal.

Literature and journalism will cease to be a means of money-making and living at the cost of others. But is there any one who knows literature and journalism from within, and who does not ardently desire that literature should at last be able to free itself from those who formerly protected it, and who now exploit it, and from the multitude which with rare exceptions pays it in proportion to its mediocrity, or to the ease with which it adapts itself to the bad taste of the greater number?

Letters and science will only take their proper place in the work of human development when, freed from all mercenary bondage, they will be exclusively cultivated by those that love them, and for those that love them.
IV

Literature, science, and art must be cultivated by free men. Only on this condition will they succeed in emancipating themselves from the yoke of the State, of Capital, and of the bourgeois mediocrity which stifles them.

What means has the scientist of to-day to make researches that interest him? Should he ask help of the State, which can only be given to one candidate in a hundred, and which none may obtain who does not ostensibly promise to keep to the beaten track? Let us remember how the Institute of France censured Darwin how the Academy of St. Petersburg treated Mendeléeff with contempt, and how the Royal Society of London refused to publish Joule’s paper, in which he determined the mechanical equivalent of heat, finding it “unscientific.”[6]

It is why all great researches, all discoveries revolutionizing science, have been made outside academies and universities, either by men rich enough to remain independent, like Darwin and Lyell, or by men who undermined their health by working in poverty and often in great straits, losing no end of time for want of a laboratory, and unable to procure the instruments or books necessary to continue their researches, but persevering against hope and often dying before they had reached the end in view Their name is legion.

Altogether, the system of help granted by the State is so bad that science has always endeavoured to emancipate itself from it. For this very reason there are thousands of learned societies organized and maintained by volunteers in Europe and America, — some having developed to such a degree that all the resources of subventioned societies, and the wealth of millionaires would not buy their treasures. No governmental institution is as rich as the Zoological Society of London, which is supported by voluntary contributions.

It does not buy the animals which in thousands people its gardens: they are sent by other societies and by collectors of the entire world. The Zoological Society of Bombay will send an elephant as a gift; another time a hippopotamus or a rhinoceros is offered by Egyptian naturalists.

And these magnificent presents are pouring in every day, arriving from all quarters of the globe — birds, reptiles, collections of insects, etc. These consignments often comprise animals that could not be bought for all the gold in the world; thus, a traveller who has captured an animal at life’s peril, and now loves it as he would love a child, will give it to the Society because he is sure it will be cared for. The entrance fee paid by visitors and they are numberless, suffices for the maintenance of that immense institution.

What is defective in the Zoological Society of London, and in other kindred societies, is that the member’s fee cannot be paid in work: that the keepers and numerous employés of this Large institution are not recognized as members of the Society, while many have no other incentive to joining the society than to put the cabalistic letters F.Z.S. (Fellow of the Zoological Society) on their cards. In a word, what is needed is a more perfect co-operation.

We may say the same about inventors that we have said of scientists. Who does not know what sufferings nearly all great inventions that have come to light have cost? Sleepless nights, families deprived of bread, want of tools and materials for experiments, is the history of nearly all those who have enriched industry with inventions which are the truly legitimate pride of our civilization.

But what are we to do to alter conditions that everybody is convinced are bad? Patents have been tried, and we know with what results. The inventor sells his patent for a few shillings, and the man who has only lent the capital pockets the often enormous profits resulting from the invention. Besides, patents isolate the inventor. They compel him to keep secret his researches which therefore end in failure; whereas the simplest suggestion, coming from a brain less absorbed in the fundamental idea, sometimes suffices to fertilize the invention and make it practical. Like all State control, patents hamper the progress of industry. Thought being incapable of being patented, patents are a crying injustice in theory, and in practice they result in one of the great obstacles to the rapid development of invention.

What is needed to promote the spirit of invention is, first of all, the awakening of thought, the boldness of conception, which our entire education causes to languish; it is the spreading of a scientific education, which would increase the number of inquirers a hundred-fold; it is faith that humanity is going to take a step forward, because it is enthusiasm, the hope of doing good, that has inspired all the great inventors. The Social Revolution alone can give this impulse to thought, this boldness, this knowledge, this conviction of working for all.

Then we shall have vast institutes supplied with motor-power and tools of all sorts, immense industrial laboratories open to all inquirers, where men will be able to work out their dreams, after having acquitted themselves of their duty towards society; where they will spend their five or six hours of leisure; where they will make their experiments; where they will find other comrades, experts in other branches of industry, likewise coming to study some difficult problem, and therefore able to help and enlighten each other, the encounter of their ideas and experience causing the longed-for solution to be found. And yet again, this is no dream. Solanoy Gorodok, in Petersburg, has already partially realized it as regards technical matters. It is a factory well furnished with tools and free to all; tools and motor-power are supplied gratis, only metals and wood are charged for at cost price. Unfortunately workmen only go there at night when worn out by ten hours’ labour in the workshop. Moreover, they carefully hide their inventions from each other, as they are hampered by patents and Capitalism, that bane of present society, that stumbling-block in the path of intellectual and moral progress.
V

And what about art? From all sides we hear lamentations about the decadence of art. We are, indeed, far behind the great masters of the Renaissance. The technicalities of art have recently made great progress; thousands of people gifted with a certain amount of talent cultivate every branch, but art seems to fly from civilization! Technicalities make headway, but inspiration frequents artists’ studios less than ever.

Where, indeed, should it come from? Only a grand idea can inspire art. Art is in our ideal synonymous with creation, it must look ahead; but save a few rare, very rare exceptions, the professional artist remains too philistine to perceive new horizons.

Moreover, this inspiration cannot come from books; it must be drawn from life, and present society cannot arouse it.

Raphael and Murillo painted at a time when the search of a new ideal could adapt itself to old religious traditions. They painted to decorate great churches which represented the pious work of several generations. The basilic with its mysterious aspect, its grandeur, was connected with the life itself of the city and could inspire a painter. He worked for a popular monument; he spoke to his fellow-citizens, and in return he received inspiration; he appealed to the multitude in the same way as did the nave, the pillars, the stained windows, the statues, and the carved doors. Nowadays the greatest honour a painter can aspire to is to see his canvas, framed in gilded wood, hung in a museum, a sort of old curiosity shop, where you see, as in the Prado, Murillo’s Ascension next to a beggar of Velasquez and the dogs of Philip II. Poor Velasquez and poor Murillo! Poor Greek statues which lived in the Acropolis of their cities, and are now stifled beneath the red cloth hangings of the Louvre!

When a Greek sculptor chiselled his marble he endeavoured to express the spirit and heart of the city. All its passions, all its traditions of glory, were to live again in the work. But to-day the united city has ceased to exist; there is no more communion of ideas. The town is a chance agglomeration of people who do not know one another, who have no common interest, save the of enriching themselves at the expense of one another. The fatherland does not exist.... What fatherland can the international banker and the rag-picker have in common? Only when cities, territories, nations, or groups of nations, will have renewed their harmonious life, will art be able to draw its inspiration from ideals held in common. Then will the architect conceive the city’s monument which will no longer be a temple, a prison, or a fortress; then will the painter, the sculptor, the carver, the ornament; worker know where to put their canvases, their statues, and their decorations; deriving their power of execution from the same vital source, and gloriously marching all together towards the future.

But till then art can only vegetate. The best canvases of modern artists are those that represent nature, villages, valleys, the sea with its dangers, the mountain with its splendours. But how can the painter express the poetry of work in the fields if he has only contemplated it, imagined it, if he has never delighted in it himself? If he only knows it as a bird of passage knows the country he soars over on his migrations? If, in the vigour of early youth, he has not followed the plough at dawn and enjoyed mowing grass with a large swathe of the scythe next to hardly haymakers vying in energy with lively young girls who fill the air with their songs? The love of the soil and of what grows on it is not acquired by sketching with a paint brush — it is only in its service; and without loving it, how paint it. This is why all that the best painters have produced in this direction is still so imperfect, not true to life, nearly always merely sentimental. There is no strength in it.

You must have seen a sunset when returning from work. You must have been a peasant among peasants to keep the splendour of it in your eye. You must have been at sea with fishermen at all hours of the day and night, have fished yourself, struggled with the waves faced the storm, and after rough work experienced the joy of hauling a heavy net, or the disappointment of seeing it empty, to understand the poetry of fishing. You must have spent time in a factory, known the fatigues and the joys of creative work, forged metals by the vivid light of a blast furnace, have felt the life in a machine, to understand the power of man and to express it in a work of art. You must in fact, be permeated with popular feelings, to describe them. Besides, the works of future artists who will have lived the life of the people, like the great artists of the past, will not be destined for sale. They will be an integrant part of a living whole that would not be complete without them, any more than they would be complete without it. Men will go to the artist’s own city to gaze at his work, and the spirited and serene beauty of such creations will produce its beneficial effect on heart and mind.

Art, in order to develop, must be bound up with industry by a thousand intermediate degrees blended, so to say, as Ruskin and the great Socialist poet Morris have proved so often and so well. Everything that surrounds man, in the street, in the interior and exterior of public monuments, must be of a pure artistic form.

But this will only be capable of realization in a society in which all enjoy comfort and leisure. Then we shall see art associations, in which each can find room for his capacity, for art cannot dispense with an infinity of purely manual and technical supplementary works. These artistic associations will undertake to embellish the houses of their members, as those kind volunteers, the young painters of Edinburgh, did in decorating the walls and ceilings of the great hospital for the poor in their city.

A painter or sculptor who has produced a work of personal feeling will offer it to the woman he loves, or to a friend. Executed for love’s sake, will his work, inspired by love, be inferior to the art that to-day satisfies the vanity of the philistine because it has cost much money?

The same will be done as regards all pleasure not comprised in the necessaries of life. He who wishes for a grand piano will enter the association of musical instrument makers. And by giving the association part of his half-days’ leisure, he will soon possess the piano of his dreams. If he is passionately fond of astronomical studies he will join the association of astronomers, with it philosophers, its observers, its calculators, with its artists in astronomical instruments, its scientists and amateurs, and he will have the telescope he desires by taking his share of the associated work, for it is especially the rough work that is needed in an astronomical observatory bricklayer’s, carpenter’s, founder’s, mechanic’s work, the last touch being given to the instrument of precision by the artist.

In short, the five or seven hours a day which each will have at his disposal, after having consecrated several hours to the production of necessities, will amply suffice to satisfy all longings for luxury however varied. Thousands of associations would undertake to supply them. What is now the privilege of an insignificant minority would be accessible to all. Luxury, ceasing to be a foolish and ostentatious display of the bourgeois class, would become an artistic pleasure.

Every one would be the happier for it. In collective work, performed with a light heart to attain a desired end, a book, a work of art, or an object of luxury, each will find an incentive, and the necessary relaxation that makes life pleasant.

In working to put an end to the division between master and slave we work for the happiness of both, for the happiness of humanity.
Chapter 10: Agreeable Work
I

When Socialists declare that a society, emancipated from Capital, would make work agreeable, and would suppress all repugnant and unhealthy drudgery, they get laughed at. And yet even to-day we can see the striking progress made in this direction; and wherever this progress has been achieved, employers congratulate themselves on the economy of energy obtained thereby.

It is evident that a factory could be made as healthy and pleasant as a scientific laboratory. And it is no less evident that it would be advantageous to make it so. In a spacious and well-ventilated factory work is better; it is easy to introduce small ameliorations, of which each represents an economy of time or of manual labour. And if most of the workshops we know are foul and unhealthy, it is because the workers are of no account in the organization of factories, and because the most absurd waste of human energy is its distinctive feature.

Nevertheless, now and again, we already find some factories so well managed that it would be a real pleasure to work in them, if the work, be it well understood, were not to last more than four or five hours a day, and if every one had the possibility of varying it according to his tastes.

Look at this factory, unfortunately consecrated to engines of war. It is perfect as far as regards sanitary and intelligent organization. It occupies fifty English acres of land, fifteen of which are roofed with glass. The pavement of fire-proof bricks is as clean as that of a miner’s cottage, and the glass roof is carefully cleaned by a gang of workmen who do nothing else. In this factory are forged steel ingots or blooms weighing as much as twenty tons; and when you stand thirty feet from the immense furnace, whose flames have a temperature of more than a thousand degrees, you do not guess its presence save when its great jaws open to let out a steel monster. And the monster is handled by only three or four workmen, who now here, now there, open a tap, causing immense cranes to move by pressure of water in the pipes.

You enter expecting to hear the deafening noise of stampers, and you find that there are no stampers. The immense hundred-ton guns and the crank-shafts of transatlantic steamers are forged by hydraulic pressure, and instead of forging steel, the worker has but to turn a tap to give it shape, which makes a far more homogeneous metal, without crack or flaw, of the blooms, whatever be their thickness.

We expect an infernal grating, and we find machines which cut blocks of steel thirty feet long with no more noise than is needed to cut cheese. And when we expressed our admiration to the engineer who showed us round, he answered —

“It is a mere question of economy! This machine, that planes steel, has been in use for forty-two years. It would not have lasted ten years if its component parts, badly adjusted, lacking in cohesive strength, ‘interfered’ and creaked at each movement of the plane!”

“And the blast-furnaces? It would be a waste to let heat escape instead of utilizing it. Why roast the founders, when heat lost by radiation represents tons of coal?”

“The stampers that made buildings shake five leagues off were also waste! It is better to forge by pressure than by impact, and it costs less — there is less loss.”

“In a factory, light, cleanliness, the space allotted to each bench, is but a simple question of economy. Work is better done when you can see and you have elbow-room.”

“It is true,”; he said, “we were very cramped before coming here. Land is so expensive in the vicinity of large towns — landlords are so grasping!”

It is even so in mines. We know what mines are like nowadays from Zola’s descriptions and from newspaper reports. But the mine of the future will be well ventilated, with a temperature as easily regulated as that of a library; there will be no horses doomed to die below the earth: underground traction will be carried on by means of an automatic cable put in motion at the pit’s mouth. Ventilators will be always working, and there will never be explosions. This is no dream. Such a mine is already to be seen in England; we went down it. Here again this organization is simply a question of economy. The mine of which we speak, in spite of its immense depth (466 yards), has an output of a thousand tons of coal a day, with only two hundred miners — five tons a day per each worker, whereas the average for the two thousand pits in England is hardly three hundred tons a year per man.

If necessary, we could multiply examples proving that Fourier’s dream regarding material organization was not a Utopia.

This question has, however, been so frequently discussed in Socialist newspapers that public opinion might have been educated. Factory, forge, and mine can be as healthy and magnificent as the finest laboratories in modern universities, and the better the organization the more will man’s labour produce.

If it be so, can we doubt that work will become a pleasure and a relaxation in a society of equals, in which “hands” will not be compelled to sell themselves to toil, and to accept work under any conditions? Repugnant tasks will disappear, because it is evident that these unhealthy conditions are harmful to society as a whole. Slaves can submit to them, but free men will create new conditions, and their work will be pleasant and infinitely more productive. The exceptions of to-day will be the rule of to-morrow.

The same will come to pass as regards domestic work, which to-day society lays on the shoulders of that drudge of humanity — woman.
II

A society regenerated by the Revolution will make domestic slavery disappear — this last form of slavery, perhaps the most tenacious, because it is also the most ancient. Only it will not come about in the way dreamt of by Phalansterians, nor in the manner often imagined by authoritarian Communists.

Phalansteries are repugnant to millions of human beings. The most reserved man certainly feels the necessity of meeting his fellows for the purpose of common work, which becomes the more attractive the more he feels himself a part of an immense whole. But it is not so for the hours of leisure, reserved for rest and intimacy. The phalanstery and the familystery do not take this into account, or else they endeavour to supply this need by artificial groupings.

A phalanstery, which is in fact nothing but an immense hotel, can please some, and even all at a certain period of their life, but the great mass prefers family life (family life of the future, be it understood). They prefer isolated apartments, Normans and Anglo-Saxons even going as far as to prefer houses of from six to eight rooms, in which the family, or an agglomeration of friends, can live apart. Sometimes a phalanstery is a necessity, but it would be hateful, were it the general rule. Isolation, alternating with time spent in society, is the normal desire of human nature. This is why one of the greatest tortures in prison is the impossibility of isolation, much as solitary confinement becomes torture in its turn, when not alternated with hours of social life.

As to considerations of economy, which are sometimes laid stress on in favour of phalansteries, they are those of a petty tradesman. The most important economy, the only reasonable one, is to make life pleasant for all, because the man who is satisfied with his life produces infinitely more than the man who curses his surroundings.[7]

Other Socialists reject the phalanstery. But when you ask them how domestic work can be organized, they answer: “Each can do ‘his own work.’ My wife manages the house; the wives of bourgeois will do as much.” And if it is a bourgeois playing at Socialism who speaks, he will add, with a gracious smile to his wife: “Is it not true, darling, that you would do without a servant in a Socialist society? You would work like the wife of our good comrade Paul or the wife of John the carpenter?”

Servant or wife, man always reckons on woman to do the house-work.

But woman, too, at last claims her share — in the emancipation of humanity. She no longer wants to be the beast of burden of the house. She considers it sufficient work to give many years of her life to the rearing of her children. She no longer wants to be the cook, the mender, the sweeper of the house! And, owing to American women taking the lead in obtaining their claims, there is a general complaint of the dearth of women who will condescend to domestic work in the United States. My lady prefers art, politics, literature, or the gaming tables; as to the work-girls, they are few, those who consent to submit to apron-slavery, and servants are only found with difficulty in the States. Consequently, the solution, a very simple one, is pointed out by life itself. Machinery undertakes three-quarters of the household cares.

You black your boots, and you know how ridiculous this work is. What can be more stupid than rubbing a boot twenty or thirty times with a brush? A tenth of the European population must be compelled to sell itself in exchange for a miserable shelter and insufficient food, and woman must consider herself a slave, in order that millions of her sex should go through this performance every morning.

But hairdressers have already machines for brushing glossy or woolly heads of hair. Why should we not apply, then, the same principle to the other extremity? So it has been done, and nowadays the machine for blacking boots is in general use in big American and European hotels. Its use is spreading outside hotels. In large English schools, where the pupils are boarding in the houses of the teachers, it has been found easier to have one single establishment which undertakes to brush a thousand pairs of boots every morning.

As to washing up! Where can we find a housewife who has not a horror of this long and dirty work, that is usually done by hand, solely because the work of the domestic slave is of no account.

In America they do better. There are already a number of cities in which hot water is conveyed to the houses as cold water is in Europe. Under these conditions the problem was a simple one, and a woman — Mrs. Cochrane — solved it. Her machine washes twelve dozen plates or dishes, wipes them and dries them, in less than three minutes. A factory in Illinois manufactures these machines and sells them at a price within reach of the average middle-class purse. And why should not small households send their crockery to an establishment as well as their boots? It is even probable that the two functions, brushing and washing up, will be undertaken by the same association.

Cleaning, rubbing the skin off your hands when washing and wringing linen; sweeping floors and brushing carpets, thereby raising clouds of dust which afterwards occasion much trouble to dislodge from the places where they have settled down, all this work is still done because woman remains a slave, but it tends to disappear as it can be infinitely better done by machinery. Machines of all kinds will be introduced into households, and the distribution of motor-power in private houses will enable people to work them without muscular effort.

Such machines cost little to manufacture. If we still pay very much for them, it is because they are not in general use, and chiefly because an exorbitant tax is levied upon every machine by the gentlemen who wish to live in grand style and who have speculated on land, raw material, manufacture, sale, patents, and duties.

But emancipation from domestic toil will not be brought about by small machines only. Households are emerging from their present state of isolation; they begin to associate with other households to do in common what they did separately.

In fact, in the future we shall not have a brushing machine, a machine for washing up plates, a third for washing linen, and so on, in each house. To the future, on the contrary, belongs the common heating apparatus that sends heat into each room of a whole district and spares the lighting of fires. It is already so in a few American cities. A great central furnace supplies all houses and all rooms with hot water, which circulates in pipes; and to regulate the temperature you need only turn a tap. And should you care to have a blazing fire in any particular room you can light the gas specially supplied for heating purposes from a central reservoir. All the immense work of cleaning chimneys and keeping up fires — and woman knows what time it takes — is disappearing.

Candles, lamps, and even gas have had their day. There are entire cities in which it is sufficient to press a button for light to burst forth, and, indeed, it is a simple question of economy and of knowledge to give yourself the luxury of electric light. And lastly, also in America, they speak of forming societies for the almost complete suppression of household work. It would only be necessary to create a department for every block of houses. A cart would come to each door and take the boots to be blacked, the crockery to be washed up, the linen to be washed, the small things to be mended (if it were worth while), the carpets to be brushed, and the next morning would bring back the things entrusted to it all well cleaned. A few hours later your hot coffee and your eggs done to a nicety would appear on your table. It is a fact that between twelve and two o’clock there are more than twenty million Americans and as many Englishmen who eat roast beef or mutton, boiled pork, potatoes, and a seasonable vegetable. And at the lowest figure eight million fires burn during two or three hours to roast this meat and cook these vegetables; eight million women spend their time to prepare this meal, that perhaps consists at most of ten different dishes.

“Fifty fires burn,” wrote an American woman the other day, “where one would suffice!” Dine at home, at your own table, with your children, if you like; but only think yourself, why should these fifty women waste their whole morning to prepare a few cups of coffee and a simple meal! Why fifty fires, when two people and one single fire would suffice to cook all these pieces of meat and all these vegetables? Choose your own beef or mutton to be roasted if you are particular. Season the vegetables to your taste if you prefer a particular sauce! But have a single kitchen with a single fire, and organize it as beautifully as you are able to.

Why has woman’s work never been of any account? Why in every family are the mother and three or four servants obliged to spend so much time at what pertains to cooking? Because those who want to emancipate mankind have not included woman in their dream of emancipation, and consider it beneath their superior masculine dignity to think “of those kitchen arrangements,” which they have rayed on the shoulders of that drudge-woman.

To emancipate woman is not only to open the gates of the university, the law courts, or the parliaments, for her, for the “emancipated” woman will always throw domestic toil on to another woman. To emancipate woman is to free her from the brutalizing toil of kitchen and washhouse; it is to organize your household in such a way as to enable her to rear her children, if she be so minded, while still retaining sufficient leisure to take her share of social life.

It will come to pass. As we have said, things are already improving. Only let us fully understand that a revolution, intoxicated with the beautiful words Liberty, Equality, Solidarity would not be a revolution if it maintained slavery at home. Half humanity subjected to the slavery of the hearth would still have to rebel against the other half.
Chapter 11: Free Agreement
I

Accustomed as we are by hereditary prejudices and absolutely unsound education and training to see Government, legislation and magistracy everywhere around, we have come to believe that man would tear his fellow man to pieces like a wild beast the day the police took his eye off him; that chaos would come about if authority were overthrown during a revolution. And with our eyes shut we pass by thousands and thousands of human groupings which form themselves freely, without any intervention of the law, and attain results infinitely superior to those achieved under governmental tutelage.

If you open a daily paper you find its pages are entirely devoted to Government transactions and to political jobbery. A Chinaman reading it would believe that in Europe nothing gets done save by order of some master. You find nothing in them about institutions that spring up, grow up, and develop without ministerial prescription. Nothing — or hardly nothing! Even when there is a heading — “Sundry Events” — it is because they are connected with the police. A family drama, an act of rebellion, will only be mentioned if the police have appeared on the scene.

Three hundred and fifty million Europeans love or hate one another, work, or live on their incomes; but, apart from literature, theatre, or sport, their lives remain ignored by newspapers if Governments have not intervened in some way or other. It is even so with history. We know the least details of the life of a king or of a parliament; all good and bad speeches pronounced by the politicians have been preserved. “Speeches that have never had the least influence on the vote of a single member,” as an old parliamentarian said. Royal visits, good or bad humour of politicians, jokes or intrigues, are all carefully recorded for posterity. But we have the greatest difficulty to reconstitute a city of the Middle Ages, to understand the mechanism of that immense commerce that was carried on between Hanseatic cities, or to know how the city of Rouen built its cathedral. If a scholar spends his life in studying these questions, his works remain unknown, and parliamentary histories — that is to say, the defective ones, as they only treat of one side of social life — multiply, are circulated, are taught in schools.

And we do not even perceive the prodigious work accomplished every day by spontaneous groups of men, which constitutes the chief work of our century.

We therefore propose to point out some of these most striking manifestations, and to prove that men, as soon as their interests do not absolutely clash, act in concert, harmoniously, and perform collective work of a very complex nature.

It is evident that in present society, based on individual property — that is to say, on plunder, and on a narrow minded and therefore foolish individualism — facts of this kind are necessarily few in number; agreements are not always perfectly free, and often have a mean, if not execrable aim.

But what concerns us is not to give examples which we could blindly follow, and which, moreover, present society could not possibly give us. What we have to do is to prove that, in spite of the authoritarian individualism which stifles us, there remains in our life, taken as a whole, a great part in which we only act by free agreement, and that it would be much easier than we think to dispense with Government.

In support of our view we have already mentioned railways, and we are about to return to them.

We know that Europe has a system of railways, 175,000 miles long, and that on this network you can nowadays travel from north to south, from east to west, from Madrid to Petersburg, and from Calais to Constantinople, without stoppages, without even changing carriages (when you travel by express). More than that: a parcel thrown into a station will find its addressee anywhere, in Turkey or in Central Asia, without more formality needed for sending it than writing its destination on a bit of paper.

This result might have been obtained in two ways. A Napoleon, a Bismarck, or some potentate having conquered Europe, would from Paris, Berlin, or Rome, draw a railway map and regulate the hours of the trains. The Russian Tsar Nicholas I dreamt of taking such action. When he was shown rough drafts of railways between Moscow and Petersburg, he seized a ruler and drew on the map of Russia a straight line between these two capitals, saying, “Here is the plan.” And the road ad was built in a straight line, filling in deep ravines, building bridges of a giddy height, which had to be abandoned a few years later, at a cost of about £120,000 to £150,000 per English mile.

This is one way, but happily things were managed differently. Railways were constructed piece by piece, the pieces were joined together, and the hundred divers companies, to whom these pieces belonged, came to an understanding concerning the arrival and departure of their trains, and the running of carriages on their rails, from all countries, without unloading merchandise as it passes from one network to another.

All this was done by free agreement, by exchange of letters and proposals, by congresses at which relegates met to discuss certain special subjects, but not to make laws; after the congress, the delegates returned to their companies, not with a law, but with the draft of a contract to be accepted or rejected.

There were certainly obstinate men who would not be convinced. But a common interest compelled them to agree without invoking the help of armies against the refractory members.

This immense network of railways connected together, and the enormous traffic it has given rise to, no doubt constitutes the most striking trait of our century; and it is the result of free agreement. If a man had foreseen or predicted it fifty years ago, our grandfathers would have thought him idiotic or mad. They would have said: “Never will you be able to make the shareholders of a hundred companies listen to reason! It is a Utopia, a fairy tale. A central Government, with an ‘iron’ director, can alone enforce it.”

And the most interesting thing in this organization is, that there is no European Central Government of Railways! Nothing! No minister of railways, no dictator, not even a continental parliament, not even a directing committee! Everything is done by contract.

So we ask the believers in the State, who pretend that “we can never do without a central Government, were it only for regulating the traffic,” we ask them: “But how do European railways manage without them? How do they continue to convey millions of travelers and mountains of luggage across a continent? If companies owning railways have been able to agree, why should railway workers, who would take possession of railways, not agree likewise? And if the Petersburg Warsaw Company and that of Paris Belfort can act in harmony, without giving themselves the luxury of a common commander, why, in the midst of our societies, consisting of groups of free workers, should we need a Government?”
II

When we endeavour to prove by examples that even to-day, in spite of the iniquitous organization of society as a whole, men, provided their instincts be not diametrically opposed, agree without the intervention of authority, we do not ignore the objections that will be put forth.

These examples have their defective side, because it is impossible to quote a single organization exempt from the exploitation of the weak by the strong, the poor by the rich. That is why Statists will not fail to tell us with their wonted logic: “You see that the intervention of the State necessary to put an end to this exploitation!”

Only they forget the lessons of history; they do not tell us to what extent the State itself has contributed towards the existing order by creating proletarians and delivering them up to exploiters. They also forget to tell us if it is possible to put an end to exploitation while the primal causes -- private capital and poverty, two-thirds of which are artificially created by the State -- continue to exist.

As regards the complete harmony among railway companies, we expect them to say: “Do you not see railway companies oppress and ill-use their employers and their travellers! The State must intervene to protect the public!”

But have we not often repeated that as long as there are capitalists, this abuse of power will be perpetuated It is precisely the State, the would-be benefactor, that has given to the companies that monopoly which they possess to-day. Has it not created concessions, guarantees? Has it not sent its soldiers against railwaymen on strike? And during the first trials (we see it in Russia), has it not extended the privilege to forbidding the press mentioning railway accidents, so as not to depreciate the shares it guaranteed? Has it not favoured the monopoly which has anointed the Vanderbilts and the Polyakoffs, the directors of the P.L.M., the C.P.R., the St. Gothard, “the kings of the times”?

Therefore, if we give as an example the tacit agreement come to between railway companies, it is by no means as an ideal of economical management, nor even an ideal of technical organization. It is to show that if capitalists, without any other aim than that of augmenting their dividends at other people's expense, can exploit railways successfully without establishing an International Department, societies of working men will be able to do it just as well, and even better, without nominating a Ministry of European railways.

Another objection is raised that is more serious at first sight. We may be told that the agreement we speak of is not perfectly free, that the large companies lay down the law to the small ones. They might, for example, quote a certain rich company compelling travellers who go from Berlin to Bâle to pass via Cologne and Frankfort, instead of taking the Leipzig route; a second, carrying goods sixty or a hundred and thirty miles in a roundabout way (on long distances) to favour influential shareholders; a third, ruining secondary lines. In the United States travellers and goods are sometimes compelled to travel impossibly circuitous routes so that dollars may flow into the pocket of a Vanderbilt.

Our answer will be the same: As long as Capital exists, the greater' Capital will oppress the lesser. But oppression does not result from Capital only. It is also owing to the support given them by the State, to monopoly created by the State in their favour, that certain large companies oppress the little ones. The early Socialists have shown how English legislation did all in its powers to ruin small industries, drive the peasant to poverty, and deliver over to wealthy industrial employers battalions of men, compelled to work for no matter what salary. Railway legislation did exactly the same. Strategic lines, subsidized lines, companies which received the International Mail monopoly, everything was brought into play to forward wealthy financiers' interests. When Rothschild, creditor to all European States, puts capital in a railway, his faithful subjects, the ministers, will do their best to make him earn more.

In the United States, in the Democracy that authoritarians hold up to us as an ideal, the most scandalous fraudulency has crept into everything that concerns railroads. Thus, if a company ruins its competitors by cheap fares, it is often enabled to do so because it is reimbursed by land given to it by the State for a gratuity. Documents recently published concerning the American wheat trade have fully shown up the part played by the State in the exploitation of the weak by the strong. Here, too, the power of accumulated capital has grown tenfold and a hundredfold by State help. So that, when we see syndicates of railway companies (a product of free agreement) succeeding in protecting their small companies against big ones, we are astonished at the intrinsic force of free agreement that can hold its own against all-powerful Capital favoured by the State. It is a fact that little companies exist, in spite of the State's partiality. If in France, land of centralization, we only see five or six large companies, there are more than a hundred and ten in Great Britain who agree remarkably well, and who are certainly better organized for the rapid transit of travellers and goods than the French and German companies.

Moreover, that is not the question. Large Capital, favoured by the State, can always, if it be to its advantage, crush the lesser one. What is of importance to us is this: The agreement between hundreds of companies to whom the railways of Europe belong, was established without intervention of a central government laying down the law to the divers societies; it has subsisted by means of congresses composed of delegates, who discuss among themselves, and submit proposals, not laws, to their constituents. It is a new principle that differs completely from all governmental principle, monarchical or republican, absolute or parliamentarian. It is an innovation that has been timidly introduced into the customs of Europe, but has come to stay.
III

How often have we not read in the writings of State-loving Socialists: “Who, then, will undertake the regulation of canal traffic in future society? Should it enter the mind of one of your Anarchist 'comrades' to put his barge across a canal and obstruct thousands of boats, who will force him to yield to reason?”

Let us confess the supposition to be somewhat fanciful, yet it might be said, for instance: “Should a certain commune, or a group of communes, want to make their barges pass before others, they might perhaps block the canal in order to carry stones, while wheat, needed in another commune, would have to stand by. Who, then, would regulate the barge traffic if not the Government?”

But real life has again demonstrated that Government can be very well dispensed with here as elsewhere. Free agreement, free organization, replace that noxious and costly system, and do better.

We know what canals mean to Holland. They are its highways. We also know how much traffic there is on the canals. What is carried along our highroads and railroads is transported on canal boats in Holland. There you could find cause to fight, to make your boats pass before others. There the Government might really interfere to keep the traffic in order.

Yet it is not so. The Dutch settled matters in a more practical way, long ago, by founding a kind of guilds, or syndicates of boatmen. These were free associations sprung from the very needs of navigation. The right of way for the boats was adjusted by a certain registered order; they followed one another in turn. None were allowed to get ahead of the others under pain of being excluded from the guild. None could station more than a certain number of days along the quay, and if the owner found no goods to carry during that time, so much the worse for him; he had to depart with his empty barge to leave room for newcomers. Obstruction was thus avoided, even though the competition between the private owners of the boats continued to exist. Were the latter suppressed, the agreement would have been only the more cordial. It is unnecessary to add that the ship-owners could adhere or not to the syndicate. That was their business, but most of them elected to join it. Moreover, these syndicates offered such great advantages that they spread also along the Rhine, the Weser, the Oder, and as far as Berlin. The boatmen did not wait for a great Bismarck to annex Holland to Germany, and to appoint an Ober Haupt General Staats Canal Navigations Rath (Supreme Head Councillor of the General States Canal Navigation), with a number of stripes corresponding to the length of the title. They preferred coming to an international understanding. Besides, a number of ship-owners, whose sailing vessels ply between Germany and Scandinavia, as well as Russia, have also joined these syndicates, in order to regulate traffic in the Baltic and to bring about a certain harmony in the chassé-croisé of vessels. These associations have sprung up freely, recruiting volunteer adherents, and have nought in common with governments.

It is, however, more than probable that here too greater capital oppresses lesser. Maybe the syndicate has also a tendency to become a monopoly, especially where it receives the precious patronage of the State that will not fail to interfere with it. Let us not forget either that these syndicates represent associations whose members have only private interests at stake, and that if at the same time each ship-owner were compelled -- by the socializing of production, consumption, and exchange -- to belong to a hundred other associations for the satisfying of his needs, things would have a different aspect. A group of ship-owners, powerful on sea, would feel weak on land, and they would be obliged to lessen their claims in order to come to terms with railways, factories, and other groups.

At any rate, without discussing the future, here is another spontaneous association that has dispensed with Government. Let us quote more examples. As we are talking of ships and boats, let us mention one of the most splendid organizations that our century has brought forth, one of those we may with right be proud of -- the English Lifeboat Association.

It is known that every year more than a thousand ships are wrecked on the shores of England. At sea a good ship seldom fears a storm. It is near the coasts that danger threatens -- rough seas that shatter her stem-post, squalls that carry off her masts and sails, currents that render her unmanageable, reefs and sand banks on which she runs aground.

Even in olden times, when it was a custom among inhabitants of the coasts to light fires in order to attract vessels on to reefs, and to seize their cargoes, they always strove to save the crew. Seeing a ship in distress, they launched their nutshells and went to the rescue of shipwrecked sailors, only too often finding a watery grave themselves. Every hamlet along the seashore has its legends of heroism, displayed by woman as well as by man, to save crews in distress.

No doubt the State and men of science have done something to diminish the number of casualties. Lighthouses, signals, charts, meteorological warnings have diminished them greatly, but there remain a thousand ships and several thousand human lives to be saved every year.

To this end a few men of goodwill put their shoulders to the wheel. Being good sailors and navigators themselves, they invented a lifeboat that could weather a storm without being torn to pieces or capsizing, and they set to work to interest the public in their venture, to collect the necessary funds for constructing boats, and for stationing them along the coasts, wherever they could be of use.

These men, not being Jacobins, did not turn to the Government. They understood that to bring their enterprise to a successful issue they must have the co-operation, the enthusiasm, the local knowledge, and especially the self-sacrifice of sailors. They also understood that to find men who at the first signal would launch their boat at night, in a chaos of waves, not suffering themselves to be deterred by darkness or breakers, and struggling five, six, ten hours against the tide before reaching a vessel in distress — men ready to risk their lives to save those of others, there must be a feeling of solidarity, a spirit of sacrifice not to be bought with galloon. It was therefore a perfectly spontaneous movement, sprung from agreement and individual initiative. Hundreds of local groups arose along the coasts. The initiators had the common sense not to pose as masters. They looked for sagacity in the fishermen's hamlets, and when a lord sent £1000 to a village on the coast to erect a lifeboat station, and his offer was accepted, he left the choice of a site to the local fishermen and sailors.

Models of new boats were not submitted to the Admiralty. We read in a Report of the Association: “As it is of importance that lifeboatmen should have full confidence in the vessel they man, the Committee will make a point of constructing and equipping the boats according to the lifeboatmen's expressed wish.” In consequence every year brings with it new improvements.

The work is wholly conducted by volunteers organizing in committees and local groups; by mutual aid and agreement! -- "Oh, Anarchists! -- Moreover, they ask nothing of ratepayers, and in a year they may receive £40,000 in spontaneous subscriptions.

As to the results, here they are: In 1891 the Association possessed 293 lifeboats. The same year it saved 601 shipwrecked sailors and 33 vessels. Since its foundation it has saved 32,671 human beings. In 1886, three lifeboats with all their men having perished at sea, hundreds of new volunteers entered their names, organized themselves into local groups, and the agitation resulted in the construction of twenty additional boats. As we proceed, let us note that every year the Association sends to the fishermen and sailors excellent barometers, at a price three times less than their sale price. It propagates meteorological knowledge, and warns the parties concerned of the sudden changes predicted by men of science.

Let us repeat that these hundreds of committees and local groups are not organized hierarchically, and are composed exclusively of volunteers, life boatmen, and people interested in the work. The Central Committee, which is more of a centre for correspondence, in no wise interferes.

It is true that when voting on a question of education or local taxation takes place in a district, these committees do not, as such, take part in the deliberations, a modesty, which unfortunately the members of elected bodies do not imitate. But, on the other hand, these brave men do not allow those who have never faced a storm to legislate for them about saving life. At the first signal of distress they rush forth, concert, and go ahead. There are no galloons, but much goodwill.

Let us take another society of the same kind that of the Red Cross. The name matters little; let us examine it.

Imagine somebody saying twenty-five years ago: “The State, capable as it is of massacring twenty thousand men in a day, and of wounding fifty thousand more, is incapable of helping its own victims; as long as war exists private initiative must intervene, and men of goodwill must organize internationally for this humane work!” What mockery would not have met the man who would have dared thus to speak! To begin with he would have been called Utopian, and if that did not silence him he would have been told: “Volunteers will be found wanting precisely where they are most needed, your hospitals will be centralized in a safe place, while what is indispensable will be wanting in the ambulances. National rivalry will cause poor soldiers to die without help.” Disheartening remarks are only equalled by the number of speakers. Who of us has not heard men hold forth in this strain?

Now we know what happened. Red Cross societies organized themselves freely, everywhere, in all countries, in thousands of localities; and when the war of 1870-1 broke out, the volunteers set to work. Men and women offered their services. Thousands of hospitals and ambulances were organized; trains were started carrying ambulances, provisions, linen, and medicaments for the wounded. The English committees sent entire convoys of food, clothing, tools, grain to sow, beasts of draught, even steam-ploughs with their attendants to help in the tillage of departments devastated by the war! Only consult La Croix Rouge, by Gustave Moynier, and you will be really struck by the immensity of the work performed.

As to the prophets ever ready to deny other men's courage, good sense, and intelligence, and believing themselves to be the only ones capable of ruling the world with a rod, none of their predictions were realized. The devotion of the Red Cross volunteers was beyond all praise. They were only too glad to occupy the most dangerous posts; and whereas the salaried doctors of the State fled with their staff when the Prussians approached, the Red Cross volunteers continued their work under fire, enduring the brutalities of Bismarck's and Napoleon's officers, lavishing their care on the wounded of all nationalities. Dutch, Italians, Swedes, Belgians, even Japanese and Chinese agreed remarkably well. They distributed their hospitals and their ambulances according to the needs of the occasion. They vied with one another especially in the hygiene of their hospitals And there is many a Frenchman who still speaks with deep gratitude of the tender care he received from a Dutch or German volunteer in the Red Cross ambulances. But what is this to an authoritarian? His ideal is the regiment doctor, salaried by the State. What does he care for the Red Cross and its hygienic hospitals, if the nurses be not functionaries?

Here is then an organization, sprung up but yesterday, and which reckons its members by hundreds of thousands; possesses ambulances, hospital trains, elaborates new processes for treating wounds, and so on, and is due to the spontaneous initiative of a few devoted men.

Perhaps we shall be told that the State has something to do with this organization. Yes, States have laid hands on it to seize it. The directing committees are presided over by those whom flunkeys call princes of the blood. Emperors and queens lavishly patronize the national committees. But it is not to this patronage that the success of the organization is due. It is to the thousand local committees of each nation; to the activity of individuals, to the devotion of all those who try to help the victims of war. And this devotion would be far greater if the State did not meddle with it.

In any case, it was not by the order of an International Directing Committee that Englishmen and Japanese, Swedes and Chinamen, bestirred themselves to send help to the wounded in 1871. It was not by order of an international ministry that hospitals rose on the invaded territory and that ambulances were carried on to the battlefield. It was by the initiative of volunteers from each country. Once on the spot, they did not get hold of one another by the hair as foreseen by Jacobins; they all set to work without distinction of nationality.

We may regret that such great efforts should be put to the service of so bad a cause, and ask ourselves like the poet's child: “Why inflict wounds if you are to heal them afterwards?” In striving to destroy the power of capital and bourgeois authority, we work to put an end to massacres, and we would far rather see the Red Cross volunteers put forth their activity to bring about (with us) the suppression of war; but we had to mention this immense organization as another illustration of results produced by free agreement and free aid.

If we wished to multiply examples taken from the art of exterminating men we should never end. Suffice to quote the numerous societies to which the German army owes its force, that does not only depend on discipline, as is generally believed. I mean the societies whose aim is to propagate military knowledge.

At one of the last congresses of the Military Alliance (Kriegerbund), delegates from 2452 federated societies, comprising 151,712 members, were present. But there are besides very numerous Shooting, Military Games, Strategical Games, Topographical Studies Societies "these are the workshops in which the technical knowledge of the German army is developed, not in regimental schools. It is a formidable network of all kinds of societies, including military men and civilians, geographers and gymnasts, sportsmen and technologists, which rise up spontaneously, organize, federate, discuss, and explore the country. It is these voluntary and free associations that make up the real backbone of the German army.

Their aim is execrable. It is the maintenance of the Empire. But what concerns us, is to point out that, in spite of military organization being the “Great mission” of the State, success in this branch is the more certain the more it is left to the free agreement of groups and to the free initiative of individuals. Even in matters pertaining to war, free agreement is thus appealed to; and to further prove our assertion let us mention the three hundred thousand British volunteers, the British National Artillery Association, and the Society, now in course of organization, for the defence of England's coasts, as well as the appeals made to the commercial fleet, the Bicyclists' Corps, and the new organizations of private motor-cars and steam launches.

The State is abdicating and appealing in its holy functions to private individuals. Everywhere free organization trespasses on its domain. And yet, the facts we have quoted let us catch only a glimpse of what free agreement has in store for us in the future, when there will be no more State.
Chapter 12: Objections
I

Let us now examine the principal objections put forth against Communism. Most of them are evidently caused by a simple misunderstanding, yet they raise important questions and merit our attention.

It is not for us to answer the objections raised by authoritarian Communism — we ourselves hold with them. Civilized nations have suffered too much in the long, hard struggle for the emancipation of the individual, to disown their past work and to tolerate a Government that would make itself felt in the smallest details of a citizen’s life, even if that Government had no other aim than the good of the community. Should an authoritarian Socialist society ever succeed in establishing itself, it could not last; general discontent would soon force it to break up, or to reorganize itself on principles of liberty.

It is of an Anarchist-Communist society we are about to speak, a society that recognizes the absolute liberty of the individual, that does not admit of any authority, and makes use of no compulsion to drive men to work. Limiting our studies to the economic side of the question, let us see if such a society, composed of men as they are to-day, neither better nor worse, neither more nor less industrious, would have a chance of successful development.

The objection is known. “If the existence of each is guaranteed, and if the necessity of earning wages does not compel men to work, nobody will work. Every man will lay the burden of his work on another if he is not forced to do it himself.” Let us first remark the incredible levity with which this objection is raised, without taking into consideration that the question is in reality merely to know, on the one hand, whether you effectively obtain by wage-work the results you aim at; and, on the other hand, whether voluntary work is not already more productive to-day than work stimulated by wages. A question which would require profound study. But whereas in exact sciences men give their opinion on subjects infinitely less important and less complicated after serious research, after carefully collecting and analyzing facts, on this question they will pronounce judgment without appeal, resting satisfied with any one particular event, such as, for example, the want of success of a communist association in America. They act like the barrister, who does not see in the council for the opposite side a representative of a cause, or an opinion contrary to his own, but a simple adversary in an oratorical debate; and if he be lucky enough to find a repartee, does not otherwise care to justify his cause. Therefore the study of this essential basis of all Political Economy, the study of the most favourable conditions for giving society the greatest amount of useful products with the least waste of human energy, does not advance. They limit themselves to repeating commonplace assertions, or else they pretend ignorance of our assertions.

What is most striking in this levity is that even in capitalist Political Economy you already find a few writers compelled by facts to doubt the axiom put forth by the founders of their science, that the threat of hunger is man’s best stimulant for productive work. They begin to perceive that in production a certain collective element is introduced which has been too much neglected up till now, and which might be more important than personal gain. The inferior quality of wage-work, the terrible waste of human energy in modern agricultural and industrial labour, the ever growing quantity of pleasure-seekers, who to-day load their burden on others’ shoulders, the absence of a certain animation in production that is becoming more and more apparent; all this begins to preoccupy the economists of the “classical” school. Some of them ask themselves if they have not got on the wrong track: if the imaginary evil being, that was supposed to be tempted exclusively by a bait of lucre or wages, really exists. This heresy penetrates even into universities; it is found in books of orthodox economy.

This does not hinder a great many Socialist reformers to remain partisans of individual remuneration, and defending the old citadel of wagedom, notwithstanding that it is being delivered over stone by stone to the assailants by its former defenders.

They fear that without compulsion the masses will not work.

But during our own lifetime have we not heard the same fears expressed twice? By the anti-abolitionists in America before Negro emancipation, and by the Russian nobility before the liberation of the serfs? “Without the whip the Negro will not work,” said the anti-abolitionist. “Free from their master’s supervision the serfs will leave the fields uncultivated,” said the Russian serf-owners. It was the refrain of the French noblemen in 1789, the refrain of the Middle Ages, a refrain as old as the world, and we shall hear it every time there is a question of sweeping away an injustice. And each time actual facts give it the lie. The liberated peasant of 1792 ploughed with a wild energy unknown to his ancestors, the emancipated Negro works more than his fathers, and the Russian peasant, after having honoured the honeymoon of his emancipation by celebrating Fridays as well as Sundays, has taken up work with as much eagerness as his liberation was the more complete. There, where the soil is his, he works desperately; that is the exact word for it. The anti-abolitionist refrain can be of value to slave-owners; as to the slaves themselves, they know what it is worth, as they know its motive.

Moreover, Who but economists taught us that if a wage-earner’s work is but indifferent, an intense and productive work is only obtained from a man who sees his wealth increase in proportion to his efforts? All hymns sung in honour of private property can be reduced to this axiom.

For it is remarkable that when economists, wishing to celebrate the blessings of property, show us how an unproductive, marshy, or stony soil is clothed with rich harvests when cultivated by the peasant proprietor, they in nowise prove their thesis in favour of private property. By admitting: that the only guarantee not to be robbed of the fruits of your labour is to possess the instruments of labour — which is true — the economists only prove that man really produces most when he works in freedom, when he has a certain choice in his occupations, when he has no overseer to impede him, and lastly, when he sees his work bringing in a profit to him and to others who work like him, but bringing in nothing to idlers. This is all we can deduct from their argumentation, and we maintain the same ourselves.

As to the form of possession of the instruments of labour, they only mention it indirectly in their demonstration, as a guarantee to the cultivator that he shall not be robbed of the profits of his yield nor of his improvements. Besides, in support of their thesis in favour of private property against all other forms of possession, should not the economists demonstrate that under the form of communal property land never produces such rich harvests as when the possession is private? But it is not so; in fact, the contrary has been observed.

Take for example a commune in the canton of Vaud, in the winter time, when all the men of the village go to fell wood in the forest, which belongs to them all. It is precisely during these festivals of toil that the greatest ardour for work and the most considerable display of human energy are apparent. No salaried labour, no effort of a private owner can bear comparison with it.

Or let us take a Russian village, when all its inhabitants mow a field belonging to the commune, or farmed by it. There you will see what man can produce when he works in common for communal production. Comrades vie with one another in cutting the widest swath; women bestir themselves in their wake so as not to be distanced by the mowers. It is a festival of labour, in which a hundred people do work in a few hours that would not have been finished in a few days had they worked separately. What a sad contrast compared to the work of the isolated owner!

In fact, we might quote scores of examples among the pioneers of America, in Swiss, German, Russian, and in certain French villages; or the work done in Russia by gangs (artels) of masons, carpenters, boatmen, fishermen, etc., who undertake a task and divide the produce or the remuneration among themselves, without it passing through the intermediary of middlemen. We could also mention the great communal hunts of nomadic tribes, and an infinite number of successful collective enterprises. And in every case we could show the unquestionable superiority of communal work compared to that of the wage-earner or the isolated private owner.

Well-being, that is to say, the satisfaction of physical, artistic, and moral needs, has always been the most powerful stimulant to work. And when a hireling produces bare necessities with difficulty, a free worker, who sees ease and luxury increasing for him and for others in proportion to his efforts, spends infinitely far more energy and intelligence, and obtains first-class products in far greater abundance. The one feels riveted to misery, the other hopes for ease and luxury in the future. In this lies the whole secret. Therefore a society aiming at the well-being of all, and at the possibility of all enjoying life in all its manifestations, will supply voluntary work which will be infinitely superior and yield far more than work has produced up till now under the goad of slavery, serfdom, or wagedom.
II

Nowadays, whoever can load on others his share of labour indispensable to existence, does so, and it is admitted that it will always be so.

Now work indispensable to existence is essentially manual. We may be artists or scientists; but none of us can do without things obtained by manual work — bread, clothes, roads, ships, light, heat, etc. And, moreover, however highly artistic or however subtly metaphysical are our pleasures, they all depend on manual labour. And it is precisely this labour — basis of life — that every one tries to avoid.

We understand perfectly well that it must be so nowadays.

Because, to do manual work now, means in reality to shut yourself up for ten or twelve hours a day in an unhealthy workshop, and to remain riveted to the same task for twenty or thirty years, and maybe for your whole life.

It means to be doomed to a paltry wage, to the uncertainty of the morrow, to want of work, often to destitution, more often than not to death in a hospital, after having worked forty years to feed, clothe, amuse, and instruct others than yourself and your children.

It means to bear the stamp of inferiority all your life, because, whatever the politicians tell us, the manual worker is always considered inferior to the brain worker, and the one who has toiled ten hours in a workshop has not the time, and still less the means, to give himself the high delights of science and art, nor even to prepare himself to appreciate them; he must be content with the crumbs from the table of privileged persons.

We understand that under these conditions manual labour is considered a curse of fate.

We understand that all men have but one dream — that of emerging from, or enabling their children to emerge from this inferior state; to create for themselves an “independent” position, which means what? — To also live by other men’s work!

As long as there will be a class of manual workers and a class of “brain” workers, black hands and white hands, it will be thus.

What interest, in fact, can this depressing work have for the worker, when he knows that the fate awaiting him from the cradle to the grave will be to live in mediocrity, poverty, and insecurity of the morrow? Therefore, when we see the immense majority of men take up their wretched task every morning, we are surprised at their perseverance, at their zeal for work, at the habit that enables them, like machines blindly obeying an impetus given, to lead this life of misery without hope for the morrow; without foreseeing ever so vaguely that some day they, or at least their children, will be part of a humanity rich in all the treasures of a bountiful nature, in all the enjoyments of knowledge, scientific and artistic creation, reserved to-day to a few privileged favourites.

It is precisely to put an end to this separation between manual and brain work that we want to abolish wagedom, that we want the Social Revolution. Then work will no longer appear a curse of fate: it will become what it should be — the free exercise of all the faculties of man.

Moreover, it is time to submit to a serious analysis this legend about superior work, supposed to be obtained under the lash of wagedom.

It is enough to visit, not the model factory and workshop that we find now and again, but ordinary factories, to conceive the immense waste of human energy that characterizes modern industry. For one factory more or less rationally organized, there are a hundred or more which waste man’s labour, without a more substantial motive than that of perhaps bringing in a few pounds more per day to the employer.

Here you see youths from twenty to twenty five years of age, sitting all day long on a bench, their chests sunken in, feverishly shaking their heads and bodies to tie, with the speed of conjurers, the two ends of worthless scraps of cotton, the refuse of the lace-looms. What progeny will these trembling and rickety bodies bequeath to their country? “But they occupy so little room in the factory, and each of them brings me in sixpence a day,” will say the employer.

In an immense London factory you could see girls, bald at seventeen from carrying trays of matches on their heads from one room to another, when the simplest machine could wheel the matches to their tables. But...it costs so little, the work of women who have no special trade! What is the use of a machine? When these can do no more, they will be easily replaced...there are so many in the street.

On the steps of a mansion on an icy night you will find a bare-footed child asleep, with its bundle of papers in its arms...child-labour costs so little that it may well be employed, every evening, to sell tenpenny-worth of papers, of which the poor boy will receive a penny, or a penny half-penny. And lastly, you may see a robust man tramping, dangling his arms; he has been out of work for months. Meanwhile his daughter grows pale in the overheated vapours of the workshop for dressing stuffs, and his son fills blacking pots by hand, or waits hours at the corner of a street till a passer-by enables him to earn a penny.

And so it is everywhere, from San Francisco to Moscow, and from Naples to Stockholm. The waste of human energy is the distinguishing and predominant trait of industry, not to mention trade where it attains still more colossal proportions.

What a sad satire is that name, Political Economy, given to the science of waste of energy under the system of wagedom!

This is not all. If you speak to the director of a well-organized factory, he will naively explain to you that it is difficult nowadays to find a skilful, vigorous, and energetic workman, who works with a will. “Should such a man present himself among the twenty or thirty who call every Monday asking us for work, he is sure to be received, even if we are reducing the number of our hands. We recognize him at the first glance, and he is always accepted, even though we have to get rid of an older and less active worker the next day.” And the one who has just received notice to quit, and all those who receive it to-morrow, go to reinforce that immense reserve army of capital — workmen out of work — who are only called to the loom or the bench when there is pressure of work, or to oppose strikers. And those others, the average workers that are the refuse of the better-class factories? They join the equally formidable army of aged and indifferent workers that continually circulates between the second-class factories — those which barely cover their expenses and make their way in the world by trickery and snares laid for the buyer, and especially for the consumer in distant countries.

And if you talk to the workmen themselves, you will soon learn that the rule in such factories is — never to do entirely what you are capable of. “Shoddy pay — shoddy work!” this is the advice which the working man receives from his comrades upon entering such a factory.

For the workers know that if in a moment of generosity they give way to the entreaties of an employer and consent to intensify the work in order to carry out a pressing order, this nervous work will be exacted in the future as a rule in the scale of wages. Therefore in all such factories they prefer never to produce as much as they can. In certain industries production is limited so as to keep up high prices, and sometimes the password, “Go-canny,” is given, which signifies, “Bad work for bad pay!”

Wage-work is serf-work; it cannot, it must not, produce all that it could produce. And it is high time to disbelieve the legend which represents wagedom as the best incentive to productive work. If industry nowadays brings in a hundred times more than it did in the days of our grandfathers, it is due to the sudden awakening of physical and chemical sciences towards the end of last century; not to the capitalist organization of wagedom, but in spite of that organization.
III

Those who have seriously studied the question do not deny any of the advantages of Communism, on condition, be it well understood, that Communism be perfectly free, that is to say, Anarchist. They recognize that work paid with money, even disguised under the name of “labour notes,” to Workers’ associations governed by the State, would keep up the characteristics of wagedom and would retain its disadvantages. They agree that the whole system would soon suffer from it, even if society came into possession of the instruments of production. And they admit that, thanks to integral education given to all children, to the laborious habits of civilized societies, with the liberty of choosing and varying their occupations and the attractions of work done by equals for the well-being of all, a Communist society would not be wanting in producers who would soon make the fertility of the soil triple and tenfold, and give a new impulse to industry.

This our opponents agree to. “But the danger,” they say, “will come from that minority of loafers who will not work, and will not have regular habits in spite of excellent conditions that make work pleasant. To-day the prospect of hunger compels the most refractory to move along with the others. The one who does not arrive in time is dismissed. But a black sheep suffices to contaminate the whole flock, and two or three sluggish or refractory workmen lead the others astray and bring a spirit of disorder and rebellion into the workshop that makes work impossible; so that in the end we shall have to return to a system of compulsion that forces the ringleaders back into the ranks. And is not the system of wages paid in proportion to work performed, the only one that enables compulsion to be employed, without hurting the feelings of the worker? Because all other means would imply the continual intervention of an authority that would be repugnant to free men.” This, we believe, is the objection fairly stated.

It belongs to the category of arguments which try to justify the State, the Penal Law, the Judge, and the Gaoler.

“As there are people, a feeble minority, who will not submit to social customs,” the authoritarians say, “we must maintain magistrates, tribunals and prisons, although these institutions become a source of new evils of all kinds.”

Therefore we can only repeat what we have so often said concerning authority in general: “To avoid a possible evil you have recourse to means which in themselves are a greater evil, and become the source of those same abuses that you wish to remedy. For do not forget that it is wagedom, the impossibility of living otherwise than by selling your labour, which has created the present Capitalist system, whose vices you begin to recognize.” Let us also remark that this authoritarian way of reasoning is but a justification of what is wrong in the present system. Wagedom was not instituted to remove the disadvantages of Communism; its origin, like that of the State and private ownership, is to be found elsewhere. It is born of slavery and serfdom imposed by force, and only wears a more modern garb. Thus the argument in favour of wagedom is as valueless as those by which they seek to apologize for private property and the State.

We are, nevertheless, going to examine the objection, and see if there is any truth in it.

To begin with, Is it not evident that if a society, founded on the principle of free work, were really menaced by loafers, it could protect itself without an authoritarian organization and without having recourse to wagedom?

Let us take a group of volunteers, combining for some particular enterprise. Having its success at heart, they all work with a will, save one of the associates, who is frequently absent from his post. Must they on his account dissolve the group, elect a president to impose fines, or maybe distribute markers for work done, as is customary in the Academy? It is evident that neither the one nor the other will be done, but that some day the comrade who imperils their enterprise will be told: “Friend, we should like to work with you; but as you are often absent from your post, and you do your work negligently, we must part. Go and find other comrades who will put up with your indifference!”

This way is so natural that it is practiced everywhere nowadays, in all industries, in competition with all possible systems of fines, docking of wages, supervison, etc.; a workman may enter the factory at the appointed time, but if he does his work badly, if he hinders his comrades by his laziness or other defects, and they quarrel with him on that account, there is an end of it; he is compelled to leave the workshop.

Authoritarians pretend that it is the almighty employer and his overseers who maintain regularity and quality of work in factories. In fact, in a somewhat complicated enterprise, in which the wares produced pass through many hands before being finished, it is the factory itself, the workmen as a unity, who see to the good quality of the work. Therefore the best factories of British private industry have few overseers, far less on an average than the French factories, and less than the British State factories.

A certain standard of public morals is maintained in the same way. Authoritarians say it is due to rural guards, judges, and policemen, whereas in reality it is maintained in spite of judges, policemen, and rural guards. “Many are the laws producing crimirials!” has been said long ago.

Not only in industrial workshops do things go on in this way; it happens everywhere, every day, on a scale that only bookworms have as yet no notion of. When a railway company, federated with other companies, fails to fulfil its engagements, when its trains are late and goods lie neglected at the stations, the other companies threaten to cancel the contract, and that threat usually suffices.

It is generally believed, at any rate it is taught, that commerce only keeps to its engagements from fear of lawsuits. Nothing of the sort; nine times in ten the trader who has not kept his word will not appear before a judge. There, where trade is very great, as in London, the sole fact of having driven a creditor to bring a lawsuit suffices for the immense majority of merchants to refuse for good to have any dealings with a man who has compelled one of them to go to law.

Then, why should means that are used to-day among mates in the workshop, traders, and railway companies, not be made use of in a society based on voluntary work?

Take, for example, an association stipulating that each of its members should carry out the following contract: “We undertake to give you the use of our houses, stores, streets, means of transport, schools, museums, etc., on condition that, from twenty to forty-five or fifty years of age, you consecrate four or five hours a day to some work recognized as necessary to existence. Choose yourself the producing groups which you wish to join, or organize a new group, provided that it will undertake to produce necessaries. And as for the remainder of your time, combine together with those you like for recreation, art, or science, according to the bent of your taste.

“Twelve or fifteen hundred hours of work a year, in a group producing food, clothes, or houses, or employed in public health, transport, etc., is all we ask of you. For this work we guarantee to you all that these groups produce or will produce. But if not one, of the thousands of groups of our federation, will receive you, whatever be their motive; if you are absolutely incapable of producing anything useful, or if you refuse to do it, then live like an isolated man or like an invalid. If we are rich enough to give you the necessaries of life we shall be delighted to give them to you. You are a man, and you have the right to live. But as you wish to live under special conditions, and leave the ranks, it is more than probable that you will suffer for it in your daily relations with other citizens. You will be looked upon as a ghost of bourgeois society, unless some friends of yours, discovering you to be a talent, kindly free you from all moral obligation towards society by doing necessary work for you.

“And lastly, if it does not please you, go and look for other conditions else where in the wide world, or else seek adherents and organize with them on novel principles. We prefer our own.”

That is what could be done in a communal society in order to turn away sluggards if they became too numerous.
IV

We very much doubt that we need fear this contingency in a society really based on the entire freedom of the individual.

In fact, in spite of the premium on idleness offered by private ownership of capital, the really lazy man, unless he is ill, is comparatively rare.

Among workmen it is often said that bourgeois are idlers. There are certainly enough of them, but they, too, are the exception. On the contrary, in every industrial enterprise, you are sure to find one or more bourgeois who work very hard. It is true that the majority of bourgeois profit by their privileged position to award themselves the least unpleasant tasks, and that they work under hygienic conditions of air, food, etc., which permit them to do their business without too much fatigue. But these are precisely the conditions which we claim for all workers, without exception. We must also say that if, thanks to their privileged position, rich people often make absolutely useless or even harmful work in society, nevertheless the Ministers, Heads of Departments, factory owners, traders, bankers, etc., subject themselves for a few hours a day to work which they find more or less tiresome, all preferring their hours of leisure to this obligatory work. And if in nine cases out of ten this work is fateful, they find it none the less tiring for that. But it is precisely because the middle class put forth a great energy, even in doing harm (knowingly or not) and defending their privileged position, that they have succeeded in defeating the landed nobility, and that they continue to rule the masses. If they were idlers they would long since have ceased. to exist, and would have disappeared like the aristocrats. In a society that would expect only four or five hours a day of useful, pleasant, and hygienic work, they would perform their task perfectly, and they certainly would not put up with the horrible conditions in which men toil nowadays without reforming them. If a Huxley spent only five hours in the sewers of London, rest assured that he would have found the means of making them as sanitary as his physiological laboratory.

As to the laziness of the great majority of workers, only philistine economists and philanthropists say such nonsense.

If you ask an intelligent manufacturer, he will tell you that if workmen only put it into their heads to be lazy, all factories would have to be closed, for no measure of severity, no system of spying would be of any use. You should have seen the terror caused in 1887 among British employers when a few agitators started preaching the “go-canny” theory — “for bad pay bad work”; “take it easy, do not overwork yourselves, and waste all you can.” — “They demoralize the worker, they want to kill industry!” cried those who formerly inveighed against the immorality of the worker and the bad quality of his work. But if the worker were what he is represented to be — namely, the idler whom you have continually to threaten with dismissal from the workshop — what would the word “demoralization” signify?

So when we speak of a possible idleness, we must well understand that it is a question of a small minority in society; and before legislating for that minority, would it not be wise to study its origin? Whoever observes with an intelligent eye sees well enough that the child reputed lazy at school is often the one which does not understand what he is badly taught. Very often, too, it is suffering from cerebral anæmia, caused by poverty and an anti-hygienic education. A boy who is lazy at Greek or Latin would work admirably were he taught in science, especially if taught by the medium of manual labour. A girl reputed nought at mathematics becomes the first mathematician of her class if she by chance meets somebody who can explain to her the elements of arithmetic she did not understand. And a workman, lazy in the workshop, cultivates his garden at dawn, while gazing at the rising sun, and will be at work again at nightfall, when all nature goes to its rest.

Somebody said that dirt is matter in the wrong place. The same definition applies to nine-tenths of those called lazy. They are people gone astray in a direction that does not answer to their temperament nor to their capacities. In reading the biography of great men, we are struck with the number of “idlers” among them. They were lazy as long as they had not found the right path, and afterwards laborious to excess. Darwin, Stephenson, and many others belonged to this category of idlers.

Very often the idler is but a man to whom it is repugnant to make all his life the eighteenth part of a pin, or the hundredth part of a watch, while he feels he has exuberant energy which he would like to expend elsewhere. Often, too, he is a rebel who cannot submit to being fixed all his life to a work-bench in order to procure a thousand pleasures for his emulover, while knowing himself to be far the less stupid of the two, and knowing his only fault to be that of having been born in hovel instead of coming into the world in a castle.

Lastly, a good many “idlers” do not know the trade by which they are compelled to earn their living. Seeing the imperfect thing made by their own hands, striving vainly to do better, and perceiving that they never will succeed on account of the bad habits of work already acquired, they begin to hate their trade, and, not knowing any other, hate work in general. Thousands of workmen and artists who are failures suffer from this cause.

On the other hand, he who since his youth has learned to play the piano well, to handle the plans well, the chisel, the brush, or the file, so that he feels that what he does is beautiful, will never give up the piano, the chisel, or the file. He will find pleasure in his work which does not tire him, as long as he is not overdriven.

Under the one name, idleness, a series of results due to different causes have been grouped, of which each one could be a source of good, instead of being a source of evil to society. Like all questions concerning criminality and related to human faculties, facts have been collected having nothing in common with one another. They say laziness or crime, without giving themselves the trouble to analyse their cause. They are in haste to punish them, without inquiring if the punishment itself does not contain a premium on “laziness” or “crime.”[8]

This is why a free society, seeing the number of idlers increasing in its midst, would no doubt think of looking for the cause of laziness, in order to suppress it, before having recourse to punishment. When it is a case, as we have already mentioned, of simple bloodlessness, then, before stuffing the brain of a child with science, nourish his system so as to produce blood, strengthen him, and, that he shall not waste his time, take him to the country or to the seaside; there, teach him in the open air, not in books — geometry, by measuring the distance to a spire, or the height of a tree; natural sciences, while picking flowers and fishing in the sea; physical science, while building the boat he will go to fish in. But for mercy’s sake do not fill his brain with sentences and dead languages. Do not make an idler of him!...

Such a child has neither order nor regular habits. Let first the children inculcate order among themselves, and later on, the laboratory, the workshop, work done in a limited space, with many tools about, will teach them method. But do not make disorderly beings out of them by your school, whose only order is the symmetry of its benches, and which — true image of the chaos in its teachings — will never inspire anybody with the love of harmony, of consistency, and method in work.

Do not you see that by your methods of teaching, framed by a Ministry for eight million scholars, who represent eight million different capacities, you only impose a system good for mediocrities, conceived by an average of mediocrities? Your school becomes a University of laziness, as your prison is a University of crime. Make the school free, abolish your University grades, appeal to the volunteers of teaching; begin that way, instead of making laws against laziness which only serve to increase it.

Give the workman who is compelled to make a minute particle of some object, who is stifled at his little tapping machine, which he ends by loathing, give him the chance of tilling the soil, felling trees in the forest, sailing the seas in the teeth of a storm, dashing through space on an engine, but do not make an idler of him by forcing him all his life to attend to a small machine, to plough the head of a screw, or to drill the eye of a needle.

Suppress the cause of idleness, and you may take it for granted that few individuals will really hate work, especially voluntary work, and that there will be no need to manufacture a code of laws on their account.
Chapter 13: The Collectivist Wages System
I

It is our opinion that collectivists commit a twofold error in their plans for the reconstruction of society. While speaking of abolishing capitalist rule, they intend nevertheless to retain two institutions which are the very basis of this rule — Representative Government and the Wages System.

As regards so-called representative government, we have often spoken about it. It is absolutely incomprehensible to us that intelligent men — and such are not wanting in the collectivist party — can remain partisans of national or municipal parliaments after all the lessons history has given them — in France, in England, in Germany, or in the United States.

While we see parliamentary rule breaking up, and from all sides criticism of this rule growing louder — not only of its results, but also of its principles — how is it that revolutionary socialists defend a system already condemned to die?

Built up by the middle classes to hold their own against royalty, sanctioning, and at the same time strengthening, their sway over the workers, parliamentary rule is pre-eminently a middle-class rule. The upholders of this system have never seriously affirmed that a parliament or a municipal council represent a nation or a city. The most intelligent among them know that this is impossible. The middle class has simply used the parliamentary system to raise a barrier between itself and royalty, without giving the people liberty. But gradually, as the people become conscious of their interests and the variety of their interests multiply, the system can no longer work. Therefore democrats of all countries vainly imagine (livers) palliatives. The Referendum is tried and found to be a failure; proportional representation is spoken of, so is representation of minorities, and other parliamentary Utopias. In a word, they strive to find what is not to be found, and they are compelled to recognize that they are in a wrong way, and confidence in a Representative Government disappears.

It is the same with the wages system; for after having proclaimed the abolition of private property, and the possession in common of all means of production, how can they uphold the wages system in any form? It is, nevertheless, what collectivists are doing when they recommend labour-cheques.

It is easy to understand why the early English socialists came to the system of labour-cheques. They simply tried to make Capital and Labour agree. They repudiated the idea of violently laying hands on capitalist property.

It is also easily understood why Proudhon took up the idea later on. In his Mutualist system he tried to make Capital less offensive, notwithstanding the retaining of private property, which he detested from the bottom of his heart, but which he believed to be necessary to guarantee individuals against the State.

Neither is it astonishing that certain economists, more or less bourgeois, admit labour-cheques. They care little whether the worker is paid in labour-notes or in coin stamped with the effigy of the Republic or the Empire. They only care to save from destruction individual ownership of dwelling-houses, of land, of factories; in any case that of dwelling-houses and the capital that is necessary for manufacturing. And labour-notes would just answer the purpose of upholding this private property.

As long as labour-notes can be exchanged for Jewels or carriages, the owner of the house will willingly accept them for rent. And as long as dwelling-houses, fields, and factories belong to isolated owners, men will have to pay them, in one way or another, for being allowed to work in the fields or factories, or for living in the houses. The owners will accept to be paid by the workers in gold, in paper-money, or in cheques exchangeable for all sorts of commodities. But how can we defend labour-notes, this new form of wagedom, when we admit that houses, fields, and factories will no longer be private property, and that they will belong to the commune or the nation?
II

Let us closely examine this system of remuneration for work done, preached by French, German, English, and Italian collectivists (Spanish anarchists, who still call themselves collectivists, imply by Collectivism the possession in common of all instruments of production, and the “liberty of each group to divide the produce, as they think fit, according to communist or any other principles”). It amounts to this: Everybody works in field, factory, school, hospital, etc. The working-day is fixed by the State, which owns land, factories, roads, etc. Every work-day is paid for with a labour-note, which is inscribed with these words: Eight hours work. With this cheque the worker can procure all sorts of merchandise in the stores owned by the State or by divers corporations. The cheque is divisible, so that you can buy an hour’s-work worth of meat, ten minutes worth of matches, or half an hour of tobacco. After the Collectivist Revolution, instead of saying “two-pence worth of soap,” we shall say “five minutes worth of soap.”

Most collectivists, true to the distinction laid down by middle-class economists (and by Marx) between qualified work and simple work, tell us, moreover, that qualified or professional work must be paid a certain quantity more than simple work. Thus an hour’s work of a doctor will have to be considered as equivalent to two or three hours’ work of a hospital nurse, or to three hours’ work of a navvy. “Professional, or qualified work, will be a multiple of simple work,” says the collectivist Grönlund, “because this kind of work needs a more or less long apprenticeship.”

Other collectivists, such as the French Marxists, do not make this distinction. They proclaim “Equality of Wages.” The doctor, the schoolmaster, and the professor will be paid (in labour-cheques) at the same rate as the navvy. Eight hours visiting the sick in a hospital will be worth the same as eight hours spent in earth-works or else in mines or factories.

Some make a greater concession; they admit that disagreeable or unhealthy work — such as sewerage — could be paid for at a higher rate than agreeable work. One hour’s work of a sewerman would be worth, they say, two hours of a professor’s work.

Let us add that certain collectivists admit of corporations paying a lump sum for work done. Thus a corporation would say: “Here are a hundred tons of steel. A hundred workmen were required to produce them, and it took them ten days. Their work-day being an eight-hours day, it has taken them eight thousand working hours to produce a hundred tons of steed eight hours a ton.” For this the State would pay them eight thousand labour-notes of one hour each, and these eight thousand cheques would be divided among the members of the iron-works as they themselves thought proper.

On the other hand, a hundred miners having taken twenty days to extract eight thousand tons of coal, coal would be worth two hours a ton, and the sixteen thousand cheques of one hour each, received by the Guild of Miners, would be divided among their members according to their own appreciation.

If the miners protested, and said that a ton of steel should only cost six hours’ work instead of eight; if the professor wished to have his day paid twice more than the nurse, then the State would interfere and would settle their differences.

Such is, in a few words, the organization collectivists wish to see arise out of the Social Revolution. As we see, their principles are: Collective property of the instruments of production, and remuneration to each according to the time spent in producing, while taking into account the productivity of his labour. As to the political system, it would be Parliamentarianism modified by positive instructions given to those elected, by the Referendum — a vote, taken by noes or ayes by the nation.

Let us own that this system appears to us unrealizable.

Collectivists begin by proclaiming a revolutionary principle — the abolition of private property — then they deny it no sooner than proclaimed by upholding an organization of production and consumption that originated in private property.

They proclaim a revolutionary principle, and ignore the consequences that this principle will inevitably bring about. They forget that the very fact of abolishing individual property in the instruments of work — land, factories, road, capital, — must launch society into absolutly new chanels; must completely overthrow the present system of production, both in its aim as well as in its means; must modify daily relations between individuals, as soon as land, machinery, and all other instruments of production are considered common property.

They say, “No private property,” and immediately after strive to maintain private property in its daily manifestations. “You shall be a Commune as far as regards production: fields, tools, machinery, all that has been invented up till now — factories, railways, harbours, mines, etc., all are yours. Not the slightest distinction will be made concerning the share of each in this collective property.

“But from to-morrow you will minutely debate the share you are going to take in the creation of new machinery, in the digging of new mines. You will carefully weigh what part of the new produce belongs to you. You will count your minutes of work, and you will take care that a minute of your neighbours cannot buy more than yours.

“And as an hour measures nothing, as in some factories a worker can see to six power-looms at a time, while in another he only tends two, you will weigh the muscular force, the brain energy, and the nervous energy you have expended. You will accurately calculate the years of apprenticeship in order to appraise the amount each will contribute to future production. And this — after having declared that you do not take into account his share in past production.”

Well, for us it is evident that a society cannot be based on two absolutely opposed principles, two principles that contradict one another continually. And a nation or a commune that would have such an organization would be compelled to revert to private property in the instruments of production, or to transform itself immediately into a communist society.
III

We have said that certain collectivist writers desire that a distinction should be made between qualified or professional work and simple work. They pretend that an hour’s work of an engineer, an architect, or a doctor, must be considered as two or three hours’ work of a blacksmith, a mason, or a hospital nurse. And the same distinction must be made between all sorts of trades necessitating a more or less long apprenticeship and the simple toil of day labourers.

Well, to establish this distinction would be to maintain all the inequalities of present society. It would mean fixing a dividing line, from the beginning, between the workers and those who pretend to govern them. It would mean dividing society into two very distinct classes — the aristocracy of knowledge above the horny-handed lower orders — the one doomed to serve the other; the one working with its hands to feed and clothe those who, profiting by their leisure, study how to govern their fosterers.

It would mean reviving one of the distinct peculiarities of present society and giving it the sanction of the Social Revolution. It would mean setting up as a principle an abuse already condemned in our ancient crumbling society.

We know the answer we shall get. They will speak of “Scientific Socialism”; they will quote bourgeois economists, and Marx too, to prove that a scale of wages has its raison d’être, as “the labour-force” of the engineer will have cost more to society than the “labour-force” of the navvy. In fact, — have not economists tried to prove to us that if an engineer is paid twenty times more than a navvy it is because the “necessary” outlay to make an engineer is greater than that necessary to make a navvy? And has not Marx asserted that the same distinction is equally logical between two branches of manual labour? He could not conclude otherwise, having on his own account taken up Ricardo’s theory of value, and upheld that goods are exchanged in proportion to the quantity of work socially necessary for their production.

But we know what to think of this. We know that if engineers, scientists, or doctors are paid ten or a hundred times more than a labourer, and that a weaver earns three times more than an agricultural labourer, and ten times more than a girl in a match factory, it is not by reason of their “cost of production,” but by reason of a monopoly of education, or a monopoly of industry. Engineers, scientists, and doctors merely exploit their capital — their diplomas — as middle-class employers exploit a factory, or as nobles used to exploit their titles of nobility.

As to the employer who pays an engineer twenty times more than a labourer, it is simply due to personal interest; if the engineer can economize £4000 a year on the cost of production, the employer pays him £800 And if the employer has a foreman who saves £400 on the work by cleverly sweating workmen, he gladly gives him £80 or £120 a year. He parts with an extra £40 when he expects to gain £400 by it; and this is the essence of the Capitalist system. The same differences obtain among divers manual trades.

Let them, therefore, not talk to us of “the cost of production” which raises the cost of skilled labour, and tell us that a student who has gaily spent his youth in a university has a right to a wage ten times greater than the son of a miner who has grown pale in a mine since the age of eleven; or that a weaver has a right to a wage three or four times greater than that of an agricultural labourer. The cost of teaching a weaver his work is not four times greater than the cost of teaching a peasant his. The weaver simply benefits by the advantages his industry reaps in Europe, in comparison with countries that have as yet no industries.

Nobody has ever calculated the cost of production and if a loafer costs far more to society than a worker, it remains to be seen whether a robust day-labourer does not cost more to society than a skilled artisan, when we have taken into account infant-mortality among the poor, the ravages of anæmia, and premature deaths.

Could they, for example, make us believe that the 1s. 3d. paid to a Paris workwoman, the 3d. paid to an Auvergne peasant girl who grows blind at lace-making, or the 1s. 8d. paid to the peasant represent their “cost of production.” We know full well that people work for less, but we also know that they do so exclusively because, thanks to our wonderful organization, they would die of hunger did they not accept these mock wages.

For us the scale of remuneration is a complex result of taxes, of governmental tutelage, of Capitalist monopoly. In a word, of State and Capital. Therefore, we say that all wages theories have been invented after the event to justify injustices at present existing, and that we need not take them into consideration.

Neither will they fail to tell us that the Collectivist scale of wages would be an improvement. “It would be better,” so they say, “to see certain artisans receiving a wage two or three times higher than common labourers, than to see a minister receiving in a day what a workman cannot earn in a year. It would be a great step towards equality.”

For us this step would be the reverse of progress. To make a distinction between simple and professional work in a new society would result in the Revolution sanctioning and recognizing as a principle a brutal fact we submit to nowadays, but that we nevertheless find unjust. It would mean imitating those gentlemen of the French Assembly who proclaimed August 4th, 1789, the abolition of feudal rights, but who on August 8th sanctioned these same rights by imposing dues on the peasants to compensate the noblemen, placing these dues under the protection of the Revolution. It would mean imitating the Russian Government, which proclaimed, at the time of the emancipation of the serfs, that the land should henceforth belong to the nobility, while formerly the lands were considered belonging to the serfs.

Or else, to take a better known example, when the Commune of 1871 decided to pay members of the Commune Council 12s. 6d. a day, while the Federates on the ramparts received only 1s. 3d., this decision was hailed as an act of superior democratic equality. In reality, the Commune only ratified the former inequality between functionary and soldier, Government and governed. Coming from an Opportunist Chamber of Deputies, such a decision would have appeared admirable, but the Commune doomed her revolutionary principles because she failed to put them into practice.

Under our existing social system, when a minister gets paid £4000 a year, while a workman must content himself with £40 or less; when a foreman is paid two or three times more than a workman, and among workmen there is every gradation, from 8s. a day down to the peasant girl’s 3d.; we disapprove of the high salary of the minister as well as of the difference between the 8s. of the workman and the 3d. of the poor woman. And we say, “Down with the privileges of education, as well as with those of birth!” We are anarchists precisely because these privileges revolt us.

They revolt us already in this authoritarian society. Could we endure them in a society that began by proclaiming equality?

That is why some collectivists, understanding the impossibility of maintaining a scale of wages in a society inspired by the breath of the Revolution, hasten to proclaim equality of wage. But they meet with new difficulties, and their equality of wages becomes the same unrealizable Utopia as the scale of wages of other collectivists.

A society having taken possession of all social wealth, having boldly proclaimed the right of all to this wealth — whatever share they may have taken in producing it will be compelled to abandon any system of wages, whether in currency or labour-notes.
IV

The collectivists say, “To each according to his deeds”; or, in other terms, according to his share of services rendered to society. They think it expedient to put this principle into practice as soon as the Social Revolution will have made all instruments of production common property. But we think that if the Social Revolution had the misfortune of proclaiming such a principle, it would mean its necessary failure; it would mean leaving the social problem, which past centuries have burdened us with, unsolved. In fact, in a society like ours, in which the more a man works the less he is remunerated, this principle, at first sight, may appear to be a yearning for justice. But it is really only the perpetuation of past injustice. It was by virtue of this principle that wagedom began, to end in the glaring inequalities and all the abominations of present society; because, from the moment work done was appraised in currency or in any other form of wage; the day it was agreed upon that man would only receive the wage he could secure to himself, the whole history of State-aided Capitalist Society was as good as written; it germinated in this principle.

Shall we, then, return to our starting-point and go through the same evolution again ? Our theorists desire it, but fortunately it is impossible. The Revolution will be communist; if not, it will be drowned in blood, and have to be begun over again.

Services rendered to society, be they work in factory or field, or mental services, cannot be valued in money. There can be no exact measure of value (of what has been wrongly-termed exchange value), nor of use value, with regard to production. If two individuals work for the community five hours a day, year in year out, at different work which is equally agreeable to them, we may say that on the whole their labour is equivalent. But we cannot divide their work, and say that the result of any particular day, hour, or minute of work of the one is worth the result of a minute or hour of the other.

We may roughly say that the man who during his lifetime has deprived himself of leisure during ten hours a day has given far more to society than the one who has only deprived himself of leisure during five hours a day, or who has not deprived himself at all. But we cannot take what he has done during two hours and say that the yield is worth twice as much as the yield of another individual, working only one hour, and remunerate him in proportion. It would be disregarding all that is complex in industry, in agriculture, in the whole life of present society; it would be ignoring to what extent all individual work is the result of past and present labour of society as a whole. It would mean believing ourselves to be living in the Stone Age, whereas we are living in an age of steel.

If you enter a coal-mine you will see a man in charge of a huge machine that raises and lowers a cage. In his hand he holds a lever that stops and reverses the course of the machine; he lowers it and the cage turns back in the twinkling of an eye; he raises it, he lowers it again with a giddy swiftness. All attention, he follows with his eyes fixed on the wall an indicator that shows him On a small scale, at which point of the shaft the cage is at each second of its progress; as soon as the indicator has reached a certain level he suddenly stops the course of the cage, not a yard higher nor lower than the required spot. And no sooner have the colliers unloaded their coal-wagons, and pushed empty ones instead, than he reverses the lever and again sends the cage back into space.

During eight or ten consecutive hours he must pay the closest attention. Should his brain relax for a moment, the cage would inevitably strike against the gear, break its wheels, snap the rope, crush men, and obstruct work in the mine. Should he waste three seconds at each touch of the lever, in our modern perfected mines, the extraction would be reduced from twenty to fifty tons a day.

Is it he who is of greatest use in the mine? Or, is it perhaps the boy who signals to him from below to raise the cage? Is it the miner at the bottom of the shaft, who risks his life every instant, and who will some day be killed by fire-damp? Or is it the engineer, who would lose the layer of coal, and would cause the miners to dig on rock by a simple mistake in his calculations? And lastly, is it the mine owner who has put all his capital into the mine, and who has perhaps, contrary to expert advice asserted that excellent coal would be found there?

All the miners engaged in this mine contribute to the extraction of coal in proportion to their strength, their energy, their knowledge, their intelligence, and their skill. And we may say that all have the right to live, to satisfy their needs, and even their whims, when the necessaries of life have been secured for all. But how can we appraise their work?

And, moreover, Is the coal they have extracted their work? Is it not also the work of men who have built the railway leading to the mine and the roads that radiate from all its stations? Is it not also the work of those that have tilled and sown the fields, extracted iron, cut wood in the forests, built the machines that burn coal, and so on?

No distinction can be drawn between the work of each man. Measuring the work by its results leads us to absurdity; dividing and measuring them by hours spent on the work also leads us to absurdity. One thing remains: put the needs above the works, and first of all recognize the right to live, and later on, to the comforts of life, for all those who take their share in production.

But take any other branch of human activity — take the manifestations of life as a whole. Which one of us can claim the higher remuneration for his work? Is it the doctor who has found out the illness, or the nurse who has brought about recovery by her hygienic care? Is it the inventor of the first steam-engine, or the boy, who, one day getting tired of pulling the rope that formerly opened the valve to let steam enter under the piston, tied the rope to the lever of the machine, without suspecting that he had invented the essential mechanical part of all modern machinery — the automatic valve.

Is it the inventor of the locomotive, or the work man of Newcastle, who suggested replacing the stones formerly laid under the rails by wooden sleepers, as the stones, for want of elasticity, caused the trains to derail? Is it the engineer on the locomotive? The signalman who can stop trains? The switchman who transfers a train from one line to another? — To whom do we owe the transatlantic cable? Is it to the engineer who obstinately affirmed that the cable would transmit messages when learned electricians declared it to be impossible? Is it to Maury, the scientist, who advised that thick cables should be set aside for others as thin as canes? Or else to those volunteers, come from nobody knows where, who spent their days and nights on deck minutely examining every yard of the cable, and removed the nails that the stockholders of steamship companies stupidly caused to be driven into the non-conducting wrapper of the cable, so as to make it unserviceable.

And in a wider sphere, the true sphere of life, with its joys, its sufferings, and its accidents, can not each one of us recall some one who has rendered him so great a service that we should be indignant if its equivalent in coin were mentioned? The service may have been but a word, nothing but a word spoken at the right time, or else it may have been months and years of devotion, and are we going to appraise these “incalculable” services in “labour-notes”?

“The works of each!” But human society would not exist for more than two consecutive generations if every one did not give infinitely more than that for which he is paid in coin, in “cheques,” or in civic rewards. The race would soon become extinct if mothers did not sacrifice their lives to take care of their children, if men did not give all the time, without demanding an equivalent, if men did not give just to those from whom they expect no reward.

If middle-class society is decaying, if we have got into a blind alley from which we cannot emerge without attacking past institutions with torch and hatchet, it is precisely because we have calculated too much. It is because we have let ourselves be influenced into giving only to receive. It is because we have aimed at turning society into a commercial company based on debit and credit.

Collectivists know this. They vaguely under stand that a society could not exist if it carried out the principle of “Each according to his deeds.” They have a notion that necessaries — we do not speak of whims — the needs of the individual, do not always correspond to his works. Thus De Paepe tells us: “The principle — the eminently Individualist principle — would, however, be tempered by social intervention, for the education of children and young persons (including maintenance and lodging), and by the social organization for assisting the infirm and the sick, for retreats for aged workers, etc.” They understand that a man of forty, father of three children, has other needs than young man of twenty. They know that the woman who suckles her infant and spends sleepless nights at its bedside, cannot do as much work as the man who has slept peacefully. They seem to take in that men and women, worn out maybe by dint of overwork for society, may be incapable of doing as much work as those who have spent their time leisurely and pocketed their “labour-notes” in the privileged career of State functionaries.

They are eager to temper their principle. They say: “Society will not fail to maintain and bring up its children; to help both aged and infirm. Without doubt needs will be the measure of the cost that society will burden itself with, to temper the principle of deeds.”

Charity, charity, always Christian charity, organized by the State this time. They believe in improving asylums for foundlings, in effecting old-age and sick insurances — so as to temper their principle. But they cannot yet throw aside the idea of “wounding first and healing afterwards!”

Thus, after having denied Communism, after having laughed at their ease at the formula — “To each according to his needs” these great economists discover that they have forgotten something, the needs of the producers, which they now admit. Only it is for the State to estimate them, for the State to verify if the needs are not disproportionate to the work.

The State will dole out charity. Thence to the English poor-law and the workhouse is but a step.

There is but a degree, because even this stepmother of a society against whom we are in revolt has also been compelled to temper her individualist principles; she, too, has had to make concessions in a communist direction and under the same form of charity.

She, too, distributes halfpenny dinners to prevent the pillaging of her shops; builds hospital — often very bad ones, though sometimes splendid ones — to prevent the ravages of contagious diseases. She, too, after having paid the hours of labour, shelters the children of those she has wrecked. She takes their needs into consideration and doles out charity.

Poverty, we have said elsewhere, was the primary cause of wealth. It was poverty that created the first capitalist; because, before accumulating “surplus value,” of which we hear so much, men had to be sufficiently destitute to consent to sell their labour, so as not to die of hunger. It was poverty that made capitalists. And if the number of poor rapidly increased during the Middle Ages, it was due to the invasions and wars that followed the founding of States, and to the increase of riches resulting from the exploitation of the East, that tore the bonds asunder which once united agrarian and urban communities, and taught them to proclaim the principle of wages, so dear to exploiters, instead of the solidarity they formerly practised.

And it is this principle that is to spring from a revolution which men dare to call by the name of Social Revolution, a name so clear to the starved, the oppressed, and the sufferers?

It can never be. For the day on which old institutions will fall under the proletarian axe, voices will cry out: “Bread, shelter, ease for all!” And those voices will be listened to; the people will say: “Let us begin by allaying our thirst for life, for happiness, for liberty, that we have never quenched. And when we shall have tasted of this joy we will set to work to demolish the last vestiges of middle-class rule, its morality drawn from account-books, its ‘debit and credit’ philosophy, its ‘mine and yours’ institutions. ‘In demolishing we shall build,’ as Proudhon said; and we shall build in the name of Communism and Anarchy.”
Chapter 14: Consumption And Production
I

Looking at society and its political organization from a different standpoint than that of authoritarian schools — for we start from a free individual to reach a free society, instead of beginning by the State to come down to the individual — we follow the same method in economic questions. We study the needs of individuals, and the means by which they satisfy them, before discussing Production, Exchange, Taxation, Government, etc.

To begin with, the difference may appear trifling, but in reality it upsets official Political Economy.

If you open the works of any economist you will find that he begins with PRODUCTION, the analysis of means employed nowadays for the creation of wealth; division of labour, manufacture, machinery, accumulation of capital. From Adam Smith to Marx, all have proceeded along these lines. Only in the latter parts of their books do they treat of CONSUMPTION, that is to say, of the means necessary to satisfy the needs of individuals; and, moreover, they confine themselves to explaining how riches are divided among those who vie with one another for their possession.

Perhaps you will say this is logical. Before satisfying needs you must create the wherewithal to satisfy them. But before producing anything, must you not feel the need of it? Is it not necessity that first drove man to hunt, to raise cattle, to cultivate land, to make implements, and later on to invent machinery? Is it not the study of needs that should govern production? It would therefore be quite as logical to begin by considering needs and afterwards to discuss the means of production in order to satisfy these needs.

This is precisely what we mean to do.

But as soon as we look at it from this point of view, Political Economy entirely changes its aspect. It ceases to be a simple description of facts, and becomes a science. We can define it as: The study of the needs of humanity,and the means of satisfying them with the least possible waste of human energy. Its true name should be, Physiology of Society. It constitutes a parallel science to the physiology of plants and animals, which also is the study of the needs of plants and animals, and the most advantageous ways of satisfying them. In the series of social sciences, the economy of human societies takes the place, occupied in the series of biological sciences by the physiology of organic bodies.

We say, here are human beings, united in a society. All feel the need of living in healthy houses. The savage’s hut no longer satisfies them; they require a more or less comfortable solid shelter. The question is, then: whether, man’s capacity for production being given, every man can have a house of his own? and what is hindering him from having it?

And we are soon convinced that every family in Europe could perfectly well have a comfortable house, such as are built in England, in Belgium, or in Pullman City, or else an equivalent set of rooms. A certain number of days’ work would suffice to build a pretty little airy house, well fitted up and lighted by gas.

But nine-tenths of Europeans have never possessed a healthy house, because at all times common people have had to work day after day to satisfy the needs of their rulers, and have never had the necessary leisure or money to build, or to have built, the home of their dreams. And they can have no houses, and will inhabit hovels as long as present conditions remain unchanged.

As you see, we proceed contrary to economists, who immortalize the so-called laws of production, and reckoning up the number of houses built every year, demonstrate by statistics, that the new built houses not sufficing to meet all demands, nine-tenths of Europeans must live in hovels.

Let us pass on to food. After having enumerated the benefits accruing from the division of labour economists tell us the division of labour requires that some men should work at agriculture and others at manufacture. Farmers producing so much, factories so much, exchange being carried on in such a way, they analyze the sale, the profit the net gain or the surplus value,the wages, the taxes, banking, and so on.

But after having followed them so far, we are none the wiser, and if we ask them: “How is it that millions of human beings are in want of bread, when every family could grow sufficient wheat to feed ten, twenty, and even a hundred people annually?” they answer us by droning the same anthem — division of labour, wages, surplus value, capital, etc. — arriving at the same conclusion, that production is insufficient to satisfy all needs; a conclusion which, if true, does not answer the question: “Can or cannot man by his labour produce the bread he needs? And if he cannot, what is hindering him?”

Here are 350 million Europeans. They need so much bread, so much meat, wine, milk, eggs, and butter every year. They need so many houses, so much clothing. This is the minimum of their needs. Can they produce all this? and if they can, will there then be left sufficient leisure for art,science, and amusement? — in a word, for everything that is not comprised in the category of absolute necessities? If the answer is in the affirmative, — What hinders them going ahead? What must they do to remove obstacles? Is time needed? Let them take it! But let us not lose sight of the aim of production — the satisfaction of needs.

If the most imperious needs of man remain unsatisfied, what must he do to increase the productivity of his work? And is there no other cause? Might it not be that production, having lost sight of the needs of man, has strayed in an absolutely wrong direction, and that its organization is at fault? And as we can prove that such is the case, let us see how to reorganize production so as to really satisfy all needs.

This seems to us the only right way of facing things. The only way that would allow of Political Economy becoming a science — the Science of Social Physiology.

It is evident that when this science will treat of production, as it is at present carried on by civilized nations, by Hindoo communes, or by savages, it will hardly state facts otherwise than the economists state them now; that is to say as a simple descriptive chapter, analogous to descriptive chapters of Zoology and Botany. But if this chapter were written to throw light on the economy of energy, necessary to satisfy human needs, the chapter would gain in precision, as well as in descriptive value. It would clearly prove the frightful waste of human energy under the present system, and would admit, as we do, that as long as this system exists,the needs of humanity will never be satisfied.

The point of view, we see, would be entirely changed. Behind the loom that weaves so many yards of cloth, behind the steel-plate perforator, and behind the safe in which dividends are hoarded, we should see man, the artisan of production, more often than not excluded from the feast he has prepared for others. We should also understand that the standpoint being wrong, so-called laws of value and exchange are but a very false explanation of events, as they happen nowadays; and that things will come to pass very differently when production is organized in such a manner as to meet all needs of society.
II

There is not one single principle of Political Economy that does not change its aspect if you look at it from our point of view.

Take, for instance, over-production, a word which every day re-echoes in our ears. Is there a single economist, academician, or candidate for academical honours, who has not supported arguments, proving that economic crises are due to overproduction — that at a given moment more cotton, more cloth, more watches are produced than are needed! Have not men accused of “rapacity” the capitalists who are obstinately bent on producing more than can possibly be consumed! But on careful examination all these reasonings prove unsound. In fact, Is there a commodity among those in universal use which is produced in greater quantity than need be? Examine one by one all commodities sent out by countries exporting on a large scale,and you will see that nearly all are produced in insufficient quantities for the inhabitants of the countries exporting them.

It is not a surplus of wheat that the Russian peasant sends to Europe. The most plentiful harvests of wheat and rye in European Russia only yield enough for the population. And as a rule the peasant deprives himself of what he actually needs when he sells his wheat or rye to pay rent and taxes.

It is not a surplus of coal that England sends to the four corners of the globe, because only three-quarters of a ton, per head of population, annually, remain for home domestic consumption, and millions of Englishmen are deprived of fire in the winter, or have only just enough to boil a few vegetables. In fact, setting aside useless luxuries, there is in England, which exports more than any other country, but a single commodity in universal use — cottons — whose production is sufficiently great to perhaps exceed the needs of the community. Yet when we look upon the rags that pass for wearing apparel worn by over a third of the inhabitants of the United Kingdom, we are led to ask ourselves whether the cottons exported would not, within a trifle, suit the real needs of the population?

As a rule it is not a surplus that is exported, though it may have been so originally. The fable of the barefooted shoemaker is as true of nations as it was formerly of artisans. We export the necessary commodities. And we do so, because the workmen cannot buy with their wages what they have produced, and pay besides the rent and interest to the capitalist and the banker.

Not only does the ever-growing need of comfort remain unsatisfied, but strict necessaries are often wanting. “Surplus production” does, therefore, not exist, at least not in the sense which is given to it by the theorists of Political Economy.

Taking another point — all economists tell us that there is a well-proved law: “Man produces more than he consumes.” After he has lived on the proceeds of his toil, there remains a surplus. Thus, a family of cultivators produces enough to feed several families, and so forth.

For us, this oft-repeated sentence has no sense. If it meant that each generation leaves something to future generations, it would be true; thus, for example, a farmer plants a tree that will live, maybe, for thirty, forty, or a hundred years, and whose fruits will still be gathered by the farmer’s grandchildren. Or he clears a few acres of virgin soil, and we say that the heritage of future generations has been increased by that much. Roads, bridges, canals, his house and his furniture are so much wealth bequeathed to succeeding generations.

But this is not what is meant. We are told that the cultivator produces more than he need consume. Rather should they say that, the State having always taken from him a large share of his produce for taxes, the priest for tithe, and the landlord for rent, a whole class of men has been created, who formerly consumed what they produced — save what was set aside for unforeseen accidents, or expenses incurred in afforestation, roads, etc. — but who to-day are compelled to live very poorly, from hand to mouth, the remainder having been taken from them by the State, the landlord, the priest, and the usurer.

Let us also observe that if the needs of the individual are our starting-point, we cannot fail to reach Communism, an organization which enables us to satisfy all needs in the most thorough and economical way. While if we start from our present method of production, and aim at gain and surplus value, without taking into account if production corresponds to the satisfaction of needs, we necessarily arrive at Capitalism, or at most at Collectivism — both being but divers forms of our wages’ system.

In fact, when we consider the needs of the individual and of society, and the means which man has resorted to in order to satisfy them during his varied phases of development, we are convinced of the necessity of systematizing our efforts, instead of producing haphazard as we do nowadays. It grows evident that the appropriation by a few of all riches not consumed, and transmitted from one generation to another, is not in the general interest.We can state as a fact that owing to these methods the needs of three-quarters of society are not satisfied, and that the present waste of human strength is the more useless and the more criminal.

We discover, moreover, that the most advantageous use of all commodities would be, for each of them, to go, first, for satisfying those needs which are the most pressing: that, in other words, the so-called “value in use” of a commodity does not depend on a simple whim, as has often been affirmed, but on the satisfaction it brings to real needs.

Communism — that is to say, an organization which would correspond to a view of Consumption, Production, and Exchange, taken as; a whole — therefore becomes the logical consequence of the comprehension of things, the only one, in our opinion, that is really scientific.

A society that will satisfy the needs of all, and which will know how to organize production, will also have to make a clean sweep of several prejudices concerning industry, and first of all of the theory often preached by economists — The Division of Labour theory — which we are going to discuss in the next chapter.
Chapter 15: The Division of Labour
I

Political Economy has always confined itself to stating facts occurring in society, and justifying them in the interest of the dominant class. Thus it is in favour of the division of labour created by industry. Having found it profitable to capitalists it has set it up as a principle.

Look at the village smith, said Adam Smith, the father of modern Political Economy. If he has never been accustomed to making nails he will only succeed by hard toil in forging two to three hundred a day, and even then they will be bad. But if this same smith has never done anything but nails, he will easily supply as many as two thousand three hundred in the course of a day. And Smith hastened to the conclusion — “Divide labour, specialize, go on specializing; let us have smiths who only know how to make heads or points of nails, and by this means we shall produce more. We shall grow rich.”

That a smith sentenced for life to the making of heads of nails would lose all interest in his work, would be entirely at the mercy of his employer with his limited handicraft, would be out of work four months out of twelve, and that his wages would decrease when he could be easily replaced by an apprentice, Smith did not think of it when he exclaimed — “Long live the division of labour. This is the real gold-mine that will enrich the nation!” And all joined in the cry.

And later on, when a Sismondi or a J. B. Say began to understand that the division of labour, instead of enriching the whole nation, only enriches the rich, and that the worker, who for life is doomed to making the eighteenth part of a pin, grows stupid and sinks into poverty — what did official economists propose? Nothing! They did not say to themselves that by a lifelong grind at one and the same mechanical toil the worker would lose his intelligence and his spirit of invention, and that, on the contrary, a variety of occupations would result in considerably augmenting the productivity of a nation. But this is the very issue now before us.

If, however, only economists preached the permanent and often hereditary division of labour, we might allow them to preach it as much as they pleased. But ideas taught by doctors of science filter into men’s minds and pervert them; and from repeatedly hearing the division of labour, profits, interest, credit, etc., spoken of as problems long since solved, men, and workers too, end by arguing like economists, and by venerating the same fetishes.

Thus we see a number of socialists, even those who have not feared to point out the mistakes of science, justifying the division of labour. Talk to them about the organization of work during the Revolution, and they answer that the division of labour must be maintained; that if you sharpened pins before the Revolution you must go on sharpening them after. True, you will not have to work more than five hours a day, but you will have to sharpen pins all your life, while others will make designs for machines that will enable you to sharpen hundreds of millions of pins during your lifetime; and others again will be specialists in the higher branches of literature, science, and art, etc. You were born to sharpen pins while Pasteur was born to invent the inoculation against anthrax, and the Revolution will leave you both to your respective employments. Well, it is this horrible principle, so noxious to society, so brutalizing to the individual, source of so much harm, that we propose to discuss in its divers manifestations.

We know the consequences of the division of labour full well. It is evident that we are divided into two classes: on the one hand, producers who consume very little and are exempt from thinking because they only do physical work, and who work badly because their brains remain inactive; and on the other hand, the consumers, who, producing little or hardly anything, have the privilege of thinking for the others, and who think badly because the whole world of those who toil with their hands is unknown to them. The labourers of the soil know nothing of machinery those who work at machinery ignore everything about agriculture. The ideal of modern industry is a child tending a machine that he cannot and must not understand, and a foreman who fines him if his attention flags for a moment. The ideal of industrial agriculture is to do away with the agricultural labourer altogether and to set a man who does odd jobs to tend a steam-plough or a threshing-machine. The division of labour means labelling and stamping men for life — some to splice ropes in factories, some to be foremen in a business, others to shove huge coal-baskets in a particular part of a mine; but none of them to have any idea of machinery as a whole, nor of business, nor of mines. And thereby they destroy the love of work and the capacity for invention that, at the beginning of modern industry, created the machinery on which we pride ourselves so much.

What they have done for individuals, they also wanted to do for nations. Humanity was to be divided into national workshops, having each its speciality. Russia, we were taught, was destined by nature to grow corn; England to spin cotton; Belgium to weave cloth; while Switzerland was to train nurses and governesses. Moreover, each separate city was to establish a speciality. Lyons was to weave silk, Auvergne to make lace, and Paris fancy articles. Economists believed that specialization opened an immense field for production and consumption, and that an era of limitless wealth for mankind was at hand.

But these great hopes vanished as fast as technical knowledge spread abroad. As long as England stood alone as a weaver of cotton, and as a metal-worker on a large scale; as long as only Paris made artistic fancy articles, etc., all went well, economists could preach so-called division of labour without being refuted.

But a new current of thought induced all civilized nations to manufacture for themselves. They found it advantageous to produce what they formerly received from other countries, or from their colonies, which in their turn aimed at emancipating themselves from the mother-country. Scientific discoveries universalized the methods of production and henceforth it was useless to pay an exorbitant price abroad for what could easily be produced at home. Does not then this industrial revolution strike a crushing blow at the theory of the division of labour which was supposed to be so sound?
Chapter 16: The Decentralization of Industry
I

After the Napoleonic wars Britain all but succeeded in ruining the main industries which had sprung up in France at the end of the preceding century. She became also mistress of the seas and had no rivals of importance. She took in the situation, and knew how to turn its privileges and advantages to account. She established an industrial monopoly, and, imposing upon her neighbours her prices for the goods she alone could manufacture, accumulated riches upon riches.

But as the middle-class Revolution of the eighteenth century abolished serfdom and created a proletariat in France, industry, hampered for a time in its flight, soared again, and from the second half of the nineteenth century France ceased to be a tributary of England for manufactured goods. To-day she too has grown into a nation with an export trade. She sells far more than sixty million pounds’ worth of manufactured goods, and two-thirds of these goods are fabrics. The number of Frenchmen working for export or living by their foreign trade, is estimated at three millions.

France is therefore no longer England’s tributary. In her turn she has striven to monopolize certain branches of foreign industry, such as silks and ready-made clothes, and has reaped immense profits therefrom; but she is on the point of losing this monopoly for ever, as England is on the point of losing the monopoly of cotton goods.

Travelling eastwards, industry has reached Germany. Fifty years ago Germany was a tributary of England and France for most manufactured commodities in the higher branches of industry. It is no longer so. In the course of the last forty-five years, and especially since the Franco-German war, Germany has completely reorganized her industry. The new factories are stocked with the best machinery; the latest creations of industrial art in cotton goods from Manchester, or in silks from Lyons, etc., are now realized in recent German factories. It took two or three generations of workers, at Lyons and Manchester, to construct the modern machinery; but Germany adopted it in its perfected state. Technical schools, adapted to the needs of industry, supply the factories with an army of intelligent workmen — practical engineers, who can work with hand and brain. German industry starts at the point which was only reached by Manchester and Lyons after fifty years of groping in the dark, of exertion and experiments.

It follows that as Germany manufactures as well at home, she diminishes her imports from France and England year by year. She has not only become their rival in manufactured goods in Asia and in Africa, but also in London and in Paris. Shortsighted people may cry out against the Frankfort Treaty, they may explain German competition by little differences in railway tariffs; they may linger on the petty side of questions and neglect great historical facts. But it is none the less certain that the main industries, formerly in the hands of England and France, have progressed eastward, and in Germany they found a country, young, full of energy, possessing an intelligent middle class, and eager in its turn to enrich itself by foreign trade.

While Germany freed itself from subjection to France and England, manufactured her own cotton cloth, constructed her own machines — in fact, manufactured all commodities — the main industries took also root in Russia, where the development of manufacture is the more surprising as it sprang up but yesterday.

At the time of the abolition of serfdom in 1861, Russia hardly had any factories. Everything they needed — machines, rails, railway-engines, rich materials — came from the West. Twenty years later she possessed already 85,000 factories, and the goods from these factories had increased fourfold in value.

The old machinery was superseded, and now nearly all the steel in use in Russia, three-quarters of the iron, two-thirds of the coal, all railway engines, railway-carriages, rails, nearly all steamers, are made in Russia.

Russia, destined — so wrote economists — to remain an agricultural territory, has rapidly developed into a manufacturing country. She orders hardly anything from England, and very little from Germany.

Economists hold the customs responsible for these facts, and yet cottons manufactured in Russia are sold at the same price as in London. Capital taking no cognizance of fatherland, German and English capitalists, accompanied by engineers and foremen of their own nationalities, have introduced in Russia and in Poland manufactories, the excellence of whose goods compete with the best from England. If customs were abolished to-morrow, manufacture would only gain by it. Not long ago the British manufacturers delivered another hard blow to the imports of cloth and woollens from the West. They set up in southern and middle Russia immense wool factories, stocked with the most perfect machinery from Bradford, and already now Russia hardly imports more than a few pieces of English cloth and French woollen fabrics as samples.

The main industries not only move eastward, they are spreading to the southern peninsulas. The Turin Exhibition of 1884 has already shown the progress made in Italian manufactured produce, and, let us not make any mistake about it, the mutual hatred of the French and Italian middle classes has no other origin than their industrial rivalry. Spain is also becoming an industrial country; while in the East, Bohemia has suddenly sprung up to importance as a new centre of manufactures, provided with perfected machinery and applying the best scientific methods.

We might also mention Hungary’s rapid progress in the main industries, but let us rather take Brazil as an example. Economists sentenced Brazil to cultivate cotton for ever, to export it in its raw state, and to receive cotton-cloth from Europe in exchange. In fact, forty years ago Brazil had only nine wretched little cotton factories with 385 spindles. To-day there are 108 cotton-mills, possessing 715,000 spindles and 26,050 looms, which throw 234 million yards of textiles on the market annually.

Even Mexico is setting about manufacturing cotton-cloth, instead of importing it from Europe. As to the United States they have quite freed themselves from European tutelage, and have triumphally developed their manufacturing powers.

But it was India which gave the most striking proof against the specialization of national industry.

We all know the theory: the great European nations need colonies, for colonies send raw material — cotton fibre, unwashed wool, spices, etc., to the mother-land. And the mother-land, under pretence of sending them manufactured wares, gets rid of her burnt stuffs, her machine scrap-iron and every thing which she no longer has use for. It costs her little or nothing, and none the less the articles are sold at exorbitant prices.

Such was the theory — such was the practice for a long time. In London and Manchester fortunes were made while India was being ruined. In the India Museum in London unheard-of riches, collected in Calcutta and Bombay by English merchants, are to be seen.

But other English merchants and capitalists conceived the very simple idea that it would be more expedient to exploit the natives of India by making cotton-cloth in India itself, than to import from twenty to twenty-four million pounds’ worth of goods annually.

At first a series of experiments ended in failure. Indian weavers — artists and experts in their own craft — could not inure themselves to factory life; the machinery sent from Liverpool was bad; the climate had to be taken into account; and merchants had to adapt themselves to new conditions, now fully observed, before British India could become the menacing rival of the Mother-land she is to-day.

She now possesses 200 cotton factories which employ about 196,400 workmen, and contain 5,231,000 spindles and 48,400 looms, and 38 jute mills, with 409,000 spindles. She exports annually to China, to the Dutch Indies, and to Africa, nearly eight million pounds’ worth of the same white cotton-cloth, said to be England’s speciality. And while English workmen are unemployed and in great want, Indian women weave cotton by machinery for the Far East at the rate of sixpence a day. In short, intelligent manufacturers are fully aware that the day is not far off when they will not know what to do with the “factory hands” who formerly weaved cotton-cloth exported from England. Besides which it is becoming more and more evident that India will not import a single ton of iron from England. The initial difficulties in using the coal and the iron ore obtained in India have been overcome; and foundries, rivalling those in England, have been built on the shores of the Indian Ocean.

Colonies competing with the mother-land in its production of manufactured goods, such is the factor which will regulate economy in the twentieth century.

And why should India not manufacture ? What should be the hindrance ? Capital? — But capital goes wherever there are men, poor enough to be exploited. Knowledge? — But knowledge recognizes no national barriers. Technical skill of the worker? — No. Are, then, Hindoo workmen inferior to the 237,000 boys and girls, not eighteen years old, at present working in the English textile factories?
II

After having glanced at national industries it would be very interesting to turn to special industries.

Let us take silk, for example, an eminently French product in the first half of the nineteenth century. We all know how Lyons became the emporium of the silk trade. At first raw silk was gathered in southern France, till little by little they ordered it from Italy, from Spain, from Austria, from the Caucasus, and from Japan, for the manufacture of their silk fabrics. In 1875, out of five million kilos of raw silk converted into stuffs in the vicinity of Lyons, there were only four hundred thousand kilos of French silk. But if Lyons manufactured imported silk, why should not Switzerland, Germany, Russia, do as much? Silk weaving developed indeed in the villages round Zurich. Bâle became a great centre of the silk trade. The Caucasian Administration engaged women from Marseilles and workmen from Lyons to teach Georgians the perfected rearing of silkworms, and the art of converting silk into fabrics to the Caucasian peasants. Austria followed. Then Germany, with the help of Lyons workmen, built great silk factories. The United States did likewise in Paterson.

And to-day the silk trade is no longer a French monopoly. Silks are made in Germany, in Austria, in the United States, and in England. In winter, Caucasian peasants weave silk handkerchiefs at a wage that would mean starvation to the silkweavers of Lyons. Italy sends silks to France; and Lyons, which in 1870–4 exported 460 million francs’ worth of silk fabrics, exports now only one-half of that amount. In fact, the time is not far off when Lyons will only send higher class goods and a few novelties as patterns to Germany, Russia, and Japan.

And so it is in all industries. Belgium has no longer the cloth monopoly; cloth is made in Germany, in Russia, in Austria, in the United States. Switzerland and the French Jura have no longer a clockwork monopoly: watches are made everywhere. Scotland no longer refines sugar for Russia: Russian sugar is imported into England. Italy, although neither possessing coal nor iron, makes its own ironclads and engines for her steamers. Chemical industry is no longer an English monopoly; sulphuric acid and soda are made even in the Urals. Steam-engines, made at Winterthur, have acquired everywhere a wide reputation, and at the present moment, Switzerland, that has neither coal nor iron — nothing but excellent technical schools — makes machinery better and cheaper than England. So ends the theory of Exchange.

The tendency of trade, as for all else, is toward decentralization.

Every nation finds it advantageous to combine agriculture with the greatest possible variety of foundries and manufactories. The specialization, of which economists spoke so highly, enriched a number of capitalists but is now of no use. On the contrary, it is to the advantage of every region, every nation, to grow their own wheat, their own vegetables, and to manufacture all produce they consume at home. This diversity is the surest pledge of the complete development of production by mutual co-operation, and the moving cause of progress, while specialization is a hindrance to progress.

Agriculture can only prosper in proximity to factories. And no sooner does a single factory appear than an infinite variety of other factories must spring up around, so that, mutually supporting and stimulating one another by their inventions, they increase their productivity.
III

It is foolish indeed to export wheat and import flour, to export wool and import cloth, to export iron and import machinery; not only because transportation is a waste of time and money, but, above all, because a country with no developed industry inevitably remains behind the times in agriculture; because a country with no large factories to bring steel to a finished condition is also backward in all other industries; and lastly, because the industrial and technical capacities of the nation remain undeveloped.

In the world of production everything holds together nowadays. Cultivation of the soil is no longer possible without machinery, without great irrigation works, without railways, without manure factories. And to adapt this machinery, these railways, these irrigation engines, etc., to local conditions, a certain spirit of invention, a certain amount of technical skill, that lie dormant as long as spades and ploughshares are the only implements of cultivation, must be developed.

If fields are to be properly cultivated, and are to yield the abundant harvests man has the right to expect, it is essential that workshops, foundries, and factories develop within the reach of the fields. A variety of occupations, a variety of skill arising therefrom end working together for a common aim — these are the genuine forces of progress.

And now let us imagine the inhabitants of a city or a territory — whether vast or small — stepping for the first time on to the path of the Social Revolution.

We are sometimes told that “nothing will have changed”: that the mines, the factories, etc., will be expropriated, and proclaimed national or communal property, that every man will go back to his usual work, and that the Revolution will then be accomplished.

But this is a dream: the Social Revolution cannot take place so simply.

We have already mentioned that should the Revolution break out to-morrow in Paris, Lyons, or any other city — should the workers lay hands on factories, houses, and banks, present production would be completely revolutionized by this simple fact.

International commerce will come to a standstill; so also will the importation of foreign bread-stuffs; the circulation of commodities and of provisions will be paralyzed. And then, the city or territory in revolt will be compelled to provide for itself, and to reorganize production. If it fails to do so, it is death. If it succeeds, it will revolutionize the economic life of the country.

The quantity of imported provisions having decreased, consumption having increased, one million Parisians working for exportation purposes having been thrown out of work, a great number of things imported to-day from distant or neighbouring countries not reaching their destination, fancy-trade being temporarily at a standstill, What will the inhabitants have to eat six months after the Revolution?

We think that when the stores are empty, the masses will seek to obtain their food from the land. They will be compelled to cultivate the soil, to combine agricultural production with industrial production in Paris and its environs. They will have to abandon the merely ornamental trades and consider the most urgent need — bread.

Citizens will be obliged to become agriculturists. Not in the same manner as peasants who wear themselves out, ploughing for a wage that barely provides them with sufficient food for the year’ but by following the principles of market-gardeners’ intensive agriculture, applied on a large scale by means of the best machinery that man has invented or can invent. They will till the land — not, how ever, like the country beast of burden a Paris jeweller would object to that. They will reorganize cultivation, not in ten years’ time, but at once, during the revolutionary struggles, from fear of being worsted by the enemy.

Agriculture will have to be carried on by intelligent beings; availing themselves of their knowledge, organizing themselves in joyous gangs for pleasant work, like the men who, a hundred years ago, worked in the Champ de Mars for the Feast of the Federation — a work of delight, when not carried to excess, when scientifically organized, when man invents and improves his tools and is conscious of being a useful member of the community.

Of course, they will not only cultivate, they will also produce those things which they formerly used to order from foreign parts. And let us not forget that for the inhabitants of a revolted territory, “foreign parts” may include all districts that have not joined in the revolutionary movement. During the Revolutions of 1793 and 1871 Paris was made to feel that “foreign parts” meant even the country district at her very gates. The speculator in grains at Troyes starved the sansculottes of Paris more effectually than the German armies brought on French soil by the Versailles conspirators. The revolted city will be compelled to do without “foreigners,” and why not? France invented beetroot sugar when sugar-cane ran short during the continental blockade. Parisians discovered salt petre in their cellars when they no longer received any from abroad. Shall we be inferior to our grandfathers, who with difficulty lisped the first words of science?

A revolution is more than the destruction of a political system. It implies the awakening of human intelligence, the increasing of the inventive spirit tenfold, a hundredfold; it is the dawn of a new, science — the science of men like Laplace, Lamarck, Lavoisier. It is a revolution in the minds of men, more than in their institutions.

And economists tell us to return to our workshops, as if passing through a revolution were going home after a walk in the Epping forest!

To begin with, the sole fact of having laid hands on middle-class property implies the necessity of completely reorganizing the whole of economic life in workshops, in dockyards, and in factories.

And the revolution will not fail to act in this direction. Should Paris, during the social revolution, be cut off from the world for a year or two by the supporters of middle-class rule, its millions of intellects, not yet depressed by factory life — that City of little trades which stimulate the spirit of invention — will show the world what man’s brain can accomplish without asking any help from without, but the motor force of the sun that gives light, the power of the wind that sweeps away impurities, and the silent life-forces at work in the earth we tread on.

We shall see then what a variety of trades, mutually co-operating on a spot of the globe and animated by the social revolution, can do to feed, clothe, house, and supply with all manner of luxuries millions of intelligent men.

We need write no fiction to prove this. What we are sure of, what has already been experimented upon, and recognized as practical, would suffice to carry it into effect, if the attempt were fertilized, vivified by the daring inspiration of the Revolution and the spontaneous impulse of the masses.
Chapter 17: Agriculture
I

Political Economy has often been reproached with drawing all its deductions from the decidedly false principle, that the only incentive capable of forcing a man to augment his power of production is personal interest in its narrowest sense.

The reproach is perfectly true; so true that epochs of great industrial discoveries and true progress in industry are precisely those in which the happiness of all was the aim pursued, and in which personal enrichment was least thought of. Great investigators and great inventors aimed, without doubt, at the emancipation of mankind. And if Watt, Stephenson, Jacquard, etc., could have only foreseen what a state of misery their sleepless nights would bring to the workers, they would probably have burned their designs and broken their models.

Another principle that pervades Political Economy is just as false. It is the tacit admission, common to all economists, that if there is often over-production in certain branches, a society will nevertheless never have sufficient products to satisfy the wants of all, and that consequently the day will never come when nobody will be forced to sell his labour in exchange for wages. This tacit admission is found at the basis of all theories and the so-called “laws” taught by economists.

And yet it is certain that the day when any civilized association of individuals would ask itself, what are the needs of all, and the means of satisfying them, it would see that, in industry as in agriculture, it already possesses sufficient to provide abundantly for all needs, on condition that it knows how to apply these means to satisfy real needs.

That this is true as regards industry no one can contest. Indeed, it suffices to study the processes already in use to extract coals and ore, to obtain steel and work it, to manufacture what is used for clothing, etc., in large industrial establishments, in order to perceive that we could already increase our production fourfold and yet economize work.

We go further. We assert that agriculture is in the same position: the labourer, like the manufacturer, already possesses the means to increase his production, not only fourfold but tenfold, and he will be able to put it into practice as soon as he feels the need of it, as soon as the socialist organization of work will be established instead of the present capitalistic one.

Each time agriculture is spoken of, men imagine a peasant bending over the plough, throwing badly sorted corn haphazard into the ground and waiting anxiously for what the good or bad season will bring forth; or a family working from morn to night and reaping as reward a rude bed, dry bread, and coarse beverage. In a word, they picture “the wild beast” of La Bruyère.

And for this man, thus subjected to misery, the utmost relief society proposes is to reduce his taxes or his rent. But they do not even dare to imagine a cultivator standing erect, taking leisure, and producing by a few hours’ work per day sufficient food to nourish, not only his own family, but a hundred men more at the least. In their most glowing dreams of the future Socialists do not go beyond American extensive culture, which, after all, is but the infancy of agricultural art.

The agriculturist has broader ideas to-day — his conceptions are on a far grander scale. He only asks for a fraction of an acre in order to produce sufficient vegetables for a family; and to feed twenty-five horned beasts he needs no more space than he formerly required to feed one; his aim is to make his own soil, to defy seasons and climate, to warm both air and earth around the young plant; to produce, in a word, on one acre what he used to crop on fifty acres, and that without any excessive fatigue — by greatly reducing, on the contrary, the total of former labour. He knows that we will be able to feed everybody by giving to the culture of the fields no more time than what each can give with pleasure and joy.

This is the present tendency of agriculture.

While scientific men, led by Liebig, the creator of the chemical theory of agriculture, often got on the wrong tack in their love of mere theories, unlettered agriculturists opened up new roads to prosperity. Market-gardeners of Paris, Troyes, Rouen, Scotch and English gardeners, Flemish farmers, peasants of Jersey, Guernsey, and farmers on the Scilly Isles have opened up such large horizons that the mind hesitates to grasp them. While up till lately a family of peasants needed at least seventeen to twenty acres to live on the produce of the soil — and we know how peasants live — we can no longer say what is the minimum area on which all that is necessary to a family can be grown, even including articles of luxury, if the soil is worked by means of intensive culture.

Ten years ago it could already be asserted that a population of thirty million individuals could live very well, without importing anything, on what could be grown in Great Britain. But now, when we see the progress recently made in France as well as in England, and when we contemplate the new horizons which open before us, we can say that in cultivating the earth as it is already cultivated in many places, even on poor soils, fifty or sixty million inhabitants to the territory of Great Britain would still be a very feeble proportion to what man could exact from the soil.

In any case (as we are about to demonstrate) we may consider it as absolutely proved that if to-morrow Paris and the two departments of Seine and of Seine-et-Oise organized themselves as an Anarchist commune, in which all worked with their hands, and if the entire universe refused to send them a single bushel of wheat, a single head of cattle, a single basket of fruit, and left them only the territory of the two departments, they could not only produce corn, meat, and vegetables necessary for themselves, but also articles of luxury in sufficient quantities for all.

And, in addition, we affirm that the sum total of this labour would be far less than that expended at present to feed these people with corn harvested in Auvergne and Russia, with vegetables produced a little everywhere by extensive agriculture, and with fruit grown in the South.

It is self-evident that we in nowise desire “all” exchange to be suppressed, nor that each region should strive to produce that which will only grow in its climate by a more or less artificial culture. But we care to draw attention to the fact that the theory of exchange, such as is understood to-day, is strangely exaggerated — that exchange is often useless and even harmful. We assert, moreover, that people have never had a right conception of the immense labour of Southern wine growers, nor of that of Russian and Hungarian corn growers, whose excessive labour could also be very much reduced if they adopted intensive culture, instead of their present system of extensive agriculture.
II

It would be impossible to quote here the mass of facts on which we base our assertions. We are therefore obliged to refer our readers who want further information to another book, “Fields, Factories, and Workshops.” Above all we earnestly invite those who are interested in the question to read several excellent works published in France and elsewhere, and of which we give a list at the close of this book [9]. As to the inhabitants of large towns, who have as yet no real notion of what agriculture can be, we advise them to explore the surrounding market-gardens and study the cultivation. They need but observe and question market-gardeners, and a new world will be open to them. They will thus be able to see what European agriculture may be in the twentieth century; and they will understand with what force the social revolution will be armed when we know the secret of taking everything we need from the soil.

A few facts will suffice to show that our assertions are in no way exaggerated. We only wish them to be preceded by a few general remarks.

We know in what a wretched condition European agriculture is. If the cultivator of the soil is not plundered by the landowner, he is robbed by the State. If the State taxes him moderately, the money-lender enslaves him by means of promissory notes, and soon turns him into the simple tenant of a soil belonging in reality to a financial company. The landlord, the State, and the banker thus plunder the cultivator by means of rent, taxes, and interest. The sum varies in each country, but it never falls below the quarter, very often the half of the raw produce. In France agriculturists paid the State quite recently as much as 44 per cent of the gross produce.

Moreover, the share of the owner and the State always goes on increasing. As soon as the cultivator has obtained more plentiful crops by prodigies of labour, invention, or initiative, the tribute he will owe to the landowner, the State, and the banker will augment in proportion. If he doubles the number of bushels reaped per acre, rent will be doubled and taxes too, and the State will take care to raise them still more if the prices go up. And so on. In short, everywhere the cultivator of the soil works twelve to sixteen hours a day; these three vultures take from him everything he might lay by; they rob him everywhere of what would enable him to improve his culture. This is why agriculture progresses so slowly.

The cultivator can only occasionally make some progress, in some exceptional regions, under quite exceptional circumstances, following upon a quarrel between the three vampires. And yet we have said nothing about the tribute every cultivator pays to the manufacturer. Every machine, every spade, every barrel of chemical manure, is sold to him at three or four times its real cost. Nor let us forget the middleman, who levies the lion’s share of the earth’s produce.

This is why, during all this century of invention and progress, agriculture has only improved from time to time on very limited areas.

Happily there have always been small oases, neglected for some time by the vultures; and here we learn what intensive agriculture can produce for mankind. Let us mention a few examples.

In the American prairies (which, however, only yield meagre spring wheat crops, from 7 to 15 bushels an acre, and even these are often marred by periodical droughts), 500 men, working only during eight months, produce the annual food of 50,000 people. With all the improvements of the last few years, one man’s yearly labour (300 days) yields, delivered in Chicago as flour, the yearly food of 250 men. Here the result is obtained by a great economy in manual labour: on those vast plains, which the eye cannot encompass, ploughing, harvesting, thrashing, are organized in almost military fashion. There is no useless running to and fro, no loss of time — all is done with parade-like precision.

This is agriculture on a large scale — extensive agriculture, which takes the soil from nature without seeking to improve it. When the earth has yielded ail it can, they leave it; they seek elsewhere for a virgin soil, to be exhausted in its turn. But there is also “intensive” agriculture, which is already worked, and will be more and more so, by machinery. Its object is to cultivate a limited space well, to manure, to improve, to concentrate work, and to obtain the largest crop possible. This kind of culture spreads every year, and whereas agriculturists in the south of France and on the fertile plains of Western America are content with an average crop of 11 to 15 bushels per acre by extensive culture, they reap regularly 39 even 55, and sometimes 60 bushels per acre in the north of France. The annual consumption of a man is thus obtained from less than a quarter of an acre.

And the more intense the culture is, the less work is expended to obtain a bushel of wheat. Machinery replaces man at the preliminary work and for the improvements needed by the land — such as draining, clearing of stones — which will double the crops in future, once and for ever. Sometimes nothing but keeping the soil free of weeds without manuring, allows an average soil to yield excellent crops from year to year. It has been done for twenty years in succession at Rothamstead, in Hertfordshire.

Let us not write an agricultural romance, but be satisfied with a crop of 44 bushels per acre. That needs no exceptional soil, but merely a rational culture; and let us see what it means.

The 3,600,000 individuals who inhabit the two departments of Seine and Seine-et-Oise consume yearly for their food a little less than 22 million bushels of cereals, chiefly wheat; and in our hypothesis they would have to cultivate, in order to obtain this crop, 494,200 acres out of the 1,507,300 acres which they possess. It is evident they would not cultivate them with spades. That would need too much time — 96 work-days of 5 hours per acre. It would be preferable to improve the soil once for all — to drain what needed to be drained to level what needed levelling, to clear the soil of stones, were it even necessary to spend 5 million days of 5 hours in this preparatory work — an average of 10 work-days to each acre.

Then they would plough with the steam-digger, which would take one and three-fifths of a day per acre, and they would give another one and three-fifths of a day for working with the double plough. Seeds would be sorted by steam instead of taken haphazard, and they would be carefully sown in rows instead of being thrown to the four winds. Now all this work would not take 10 days of 5 hours per acre if the work were done under good conditions. But if 10 million work-days are given to good culture during 3 or 4 years, the result will be later on crops of 44 to 55 bushels per acre by only working half the time.

Fifteen million work-days will have thus been spent to give bread to a population of 3,600,000 inhabitants. And the work would be such that each could do it without having muscles of steel, or without having even worked the ground before. The initiative and the general distribution of work would come from those who know the soil. As to the work itself, there is no townsman of either sex so enfeebled as to be incapable of looking after machines and of contributing his share to agrarian work after a few hours’ apprenticeship.

Well, when we consider that in the present chaos there are, in a city like Paris, without counting the unemployed of the upper classes, about 100,000 men out of work in their several trades, we see that the power lost in our present organization would alone suffice to give, with a rational culture, bread necessary to the three or four million inhabitants of the two departments.

We repeat, this is no fancy dream, and we have not spoken of the truly intensive agriculture. We have not depended upon the wheat (obtained in three years by Mr. Hallett) of which one grain, replanted, produced 5000 or 6000, and occasionally 10,000 grains, which would give the wheat necessary for a family of five individuals on an area of 120 square yards. On the contrary, we have only mentioned what has been already achieved by numerous farmers in France, England, Belgium, etc., and what might be done to-morrow with the experience and knowledge acquired already by practice on a large scale.

But without a revolution, neither to-morrow, nor after to-morrow will see it done, because it is not to the interest of landowners and capitalists; and because peasants who would find their profit in it have neither the knowledge nor the money, nor the time to obtain what is necessary to go ahead.

The present society has not yet reached this stage. But let Parisians proclaim an Anarchist Commune, and they will of necessity come to it, because they will not be foolish enough to continue making luxurious toys (which Vienna, Warsaw, and Berlin make as well already) and to run the risk of being left without bread.

Moreover, agricultural work, by the help of machinery, would soon become the most attractive and the most joyful of all occupations.

“We have had enough jewellery and enough dolls’ clothes,” they would say; “it is high time for the workers to recruit their strength in agriculture, to go in search of vigour, of impressions of nature, of the joy of life, that they have forgotten in the dark factories of the suburbs.”

In the Middle Ages it was Alpine pasture lands, rather than guns, which allowed the Swiss to shake off lords and kings. Modern agriculture will allow a city in revolt to free itself from the combined bourgeois forces.
III

We have seen how the 3½ million inhabitants of the two departments round Paris could find ample bread by cultivating only a third of their territory. Let us now pass on to cattle.

Englishmen, who eat much meat, consume on an average a little less than 220 lb. a year per adult. Supposing all meats consumed were oxen, that makes a little less than the third of an ox. An ox a year for 5 individuals (including children) is already a sufficient ration. For 3½ million inhabitants this would make an annual consumption of 700,000 head of cattle.

To-day, with the pasture system, we need at least 5 million acres to nourish 660,000 head of cattle. This makes 9 acres per each head of horned cattle. Nevertheless, with prairies moderately watered by spring water (as recently done on thousands of acres in the south-west of France), 1¼ million acres already suffice. But if intensive culture is practiced, and beetroot is grown for fodder, you only need a quarter of that area, that is to say, about 310,000 acres. And if we have recourse to maize and practice ensilage (the compression of fodder while green) like Arabs, we obtain fodder on an area of 217,500 acres.

In the environs of Milan, where sewer water is used to irrigate the fields, fodder for 2 to 3 horned cattle per each acre is obtained on an area of 22,000 acres; and on a few favoured fields, up to 177 tons of hay to the 10 acres have been cropped, the yearly provender of 36 milch cows. Nearly nine acres per head of cattle are needed under the pasture system, and only 2½ acres for 9 oxen or cows under the new system. These are the opposite extremes in modern agriculture.

In Guernsey, on a total of 9884 acres utilized, nearly half (4695 acres) are covered with cereals and kitchen-gardens; only 5189 acres remain as meadows. On these 5189 acres, 1480 horses, 7260 head of cattle, 900 sheep, and 4200 pigs are fed, which makes more than 3 head of cattle per 2 acres, without reckoning the sheep or the pigs. It is needless to add that the fertility of the soil is made by seaweed and chemical manures.

Returning to our 3½ million inhabitants belonging to Paris and its environs, we see that the land necessary for the rearing of cattle comes down from 5 million acres to 197,000. Well, then, let us not stop at the lowest figures, let us take those of ordinary intensive culture; let us liberally add to the land necessary for smaller cattle which must replace some of the horned beasts and allow 395,000 acres for the rearing of cattle — 494,000 if you like, on the 1,013,000 acres remaining after bread has been provided for the people.

Let us be generous and give 5 million work-days to put this landinto a productive state.

After having therefore employed in the course of a year 20 million work-days, half of which are for permanent improvements, we shall have bread and meat assured to us, without including all the extra meat obtainable in the shape of fowls, pigs, rabbits, etc.; without taking into consideration that a population provided with excellent vegetables and fruit consumes less meat than Englishmen, who supplement their poor supply of vegetables by animal food. Now, how much do 20 million work-days of 5 hours make per inhabitant? Very little indeed. A population of 3½ millions must have at least 1,200,000 adult men, and as many women capable of work. Well, then, to give bread and meat to all, it would need only 17 half-days of work a year per man. Add 3 million work-days, or double that number if you like, in order to obtain milk. That will make 25 work-days of 5 hours in all — nothing more than a little pleasurable country exercise — to obtain the three principal products bread, meat, and milk. The three products which, after housing, cause daily anxiety to nine-tenths of mankind.

And yet — let us not tire of repeating — these are not fancy dreams. We have only told what is, what has been, obtained by experience on a large scale. Agriculture could be reorganized in this way to-morrow if property laws and general ignorance did not offer opposition.

The day Paris has understood that to know what you eat and how it is produced, is a question of public interest; the day when everybody will have understood that this questions is infinitely more important than all the parliamentary debates of the present times — on that day the Revolution will be an accomplished fact. Paris will take possession of the two departments and cultivate them. And then the Parisian worker, after having laboured a third of his existence in order to buy bad and insufficient food, will produce it himself, under his walls, within the enclosure of his forts (if they still exist), in a few hours of healthy and attractive work.

And now we pass on to fruit and vegetables. Let us go outside Paris and visit the establishment of a market-gardener who accomplishes wonders (ignored by learned economists) at a few miles from the academies.

Let us visit, suppose, M. Ponce, the author of a work on market-gardening, who makes no secret of what the earth yields him, and who has published it all along.

M. Ponce, and especially his workmen, work like niggers. It takes eight men to cultivate a plot a little less than 3 acres (27/10). They work 12, and even 15 hours a day, that is to say, three times more than is needed. Twenty-four of them would not be too many. To which M. Ponce will probably answer that as he pays the terrible sum of £100 rent a year for his 27/10 acres of land, and £100 for manure bought in the barracks, he is obliged to exploit. He would no doubt answer, “Being exploited, I exploit in my turn.” His installation has also cost him £1200, of which certainly more than half went as tribute to the idle barons of industry. In reality, this establishment represents at most 3000 work-days, probably much less.

But let us examine his crops: nearly 10 tons of carrots, nearly 10 tons of onions, radishes, and small vegetables, 6000 heads of cabbage, 3000 heads of cauliflower, 5000 baskets of tomatoes, 5000 dozen of choice fruit, 154,000 salads; in short, a total of 123 tons of vegetables and fruit to 27/10 acres — 120 yards long by 109 yards broad, which makes more than 44 tons of vegetables to the acre.

But a man does not eat more than 660 lb. of vegetables and fruit a year, and 2½ acres of a market-garden yield enough vegetables and fruit to richly supply the table of 350 adults during the year. Thus 24 persons employed a whole year in cultivating 27/10 acres of land, and only working 5 hours a day, would produce sufficient vegetables and fruit for 350 adults, which is equivalent at least to 500 individuals.

To put it in another way: in cultivating like M. Ponce — and his results have already been surpassed — 350 adults should each give a little more than 100 hours a year (103) to produce vegetables and fruit necessary for 500 people.

Let us mention that such a production is not the exception. It takes place, under the walls of Paris, on an area of 2220 acres, by 5000 market-gardeners. Only these market-gardeners are reduced nowadays to a state of beasts of burden, in order to pay an average rent of £32 per acre.

But do not these facts, which can be verified by every one, prove that 17,300 acres (of the 519,000 remaining to us) would suffice to give all necessary vegetables, as well as a liberal amount of fruit to the 3½ millions inhabitants of our two departments?

As to the quantity of work necessary to produce these fruits and vegetables, it would amount to 50 million work-days of 5 hours (50 days per adult male), if we measure by the market-gardeners’ standard of work. But we could reduce this quantity if we had recourse to the process in vogue in Jersey and Guernsey. We must also remember that the Paris market-gardener is forced to work so hard because he mostly produces early season fruits, the high prices of which have to pay for fabulous rents, and that this system of culture entails more work than is really necessary. The market-gardeners of Paris, not having the means to make a great outlay on their gardens, and being obliged to pay heavily for glass, wood, iron, an coal, obtain their artificial heat out of manure, while it can be had at much less cost in hothouses.
IV

The market-gardeners, we say, are forced to become machines and to renounce all joys of lift to obtain their marvellous crops. But these hard grinders have rendered a great service to humanity in teaching us that the soil can be “made.” They make it with old hotbeds of manure, which have already served to give the necessary warmth to young plants and to early fruit; and they make it in such great quantity that they are compelled to sell it in part, otherwise it would raise the level of their gardens by one inch every year. They do it so well (so Barral teaches us, in his “Dictionary of Agriculture,” in an article on market-gardeners) that in recent contracts, the market-gardener stipulates that he will carry away his soil with him when he leaves the bit of ground he is cultivating. Loam carried away on carts, with furniture and glass frames — that is the answer of practical cultivators to the learned treatises of a Ricardo, who represented rent as a means of equalizing the natural advantages of the soil. “The soil is worth what man is worth,” that is the gardeners’ motto.

And yet the market-gardeners of Paris and Rouen labour three times as hard to obtain the same results as their fellow-workers in Guernscy or in England. Applying industry to agriculture these last make their climate in addition to their soil, by means of the greenhouse.

Fifty years ago the greenhouse was the luxury of the rich. It was kept to grow exotic plants for pleasure. But nowadays its use begins to be generalized. A tremendous industry has grown up lately in Guernsey and Jersey, where hundreds of acres are already covered with glass — to say nothing of the countless small greenhouses kept in every little farm garden. Acres and acres of greenhouses have lately been built also at Worthing, in the suburbs of London, and in several other parts of England and Scotland.

They are built of all qualities, beginning with those which have granite walls, down to those which represent mere shelters made in planks and glass frames, which cost, even now, with all the tribute paid to capitalists and middlemen, less than 3s. 6d. per square yard under glass. Most of them are heated for at least three or four months every year; but even the cool greenhouses, which are not heated at all, give excellent results — of course, not for growing grapes and tropical plants, but for potatoes, carrots, peas, tomatoes, and so on.

In this way man emancipates himself from climate, and at the same time he avoids also the heavy work with the hot-beds, and he saves both in buying much less manure and in work. Three men to the acre, each of them working less than sixty hours a week, grow on very small spaces what formerly required acres and acres of land.

The result of all these recent conquests of culture is, that if one half only of the adults of a city gave each about fifty half-days for the culture of the finest fruit and vegetables out of season, they would have all the year round an unlimited supply of that sort of fruit and vegetables for the whole population.

But there is a still more important fact to notice. The greenhouse has nowadays a tendency to become a mere kitchen garden under glass. And when it is used to such a purpose, the simplest plank-and-glass unheated shelters already give fabulous crops — such as, for instance, 500 bushels of potatoes per acre as a first crop, ready by the end of April; after which a second and a third crop are obtained in the extremely high temperature which prevails in the summer under glass.

I gave in my “Fields, Factories, and Workshops,” most striking facts in this direction. Sufficient to say here, that at Jersey, 34 men, with one trained gardener only, cultivate 13 acres under glass, from which they obtain 143 tons of fruit and early vegetables, using for this extraordinary culture less than 1000 tons of coal.

And this is done now in Guernsey and Jersey on a very large scale, quite a number of steamers constantly plying between Guernsey and London, only to export the crops of the greenhouses.

Nowadays, in order to obtain that same crop of 500 bushels of potatoes, we must plough every year a surface of 4 acres, plant it, cultivate it, weed it, and so on; whereas with the glass, even if we shall have to give perhaps, to start with, half a day’s work per square yard in order to build the greenhouse — we shall save afterwards at least one-half, and probably three-quarters of the formerly required yearly labour.

These are facts, results which every one can verify himself. And these facts are already a hint as to what man could obtain from the earth if he treated it with intelligence.
V

In all the above we have reasoned upon what already withstood the test of experience. Intensive culture of the fields, irrigated meadows, the hothouse, and finally the kitchen garden under glass are realities. Moreover, the tendency is to extend and to generalize these methods of culture, because they allow of obtaining more produce with less work and with more certainty.

In fact, after having studied the most simple glass shelters of Guernsey, we affirm that, taking all in all, far less work is expended for obtaining potatoes under glass in April, than in growing them in the open air, which requires digging a space four times as large, watering it, weeding it, etc. Work is likewise economized in employing a perfected tool or machine, even when an initial expense had to be incurred to buy the tool.

Complete figures concerning the culture of common vegetables under glass are still wanting. This culture is of recent origin, and is only carried out on small areas. But we have already figures concerning the fifty years old culture of early season grapes, and these figures are conclusive.

In the north of England, on the Scotch frontier, where coal only costs 3s. a ton at the pit’s mouth, they have long since taken to growing hothouse grapes. Thirty years ago these grapes, ripe in January, were sold by the grower at 20s. per lb. and resold at 40s. per lb. for Napoleon III’s table. To-day the same grower sells them at only 2s. 6d. per lb. He tells us so himself in a horticultural journal. The fall is caused by tons and tons of grapes arriving in January to London and Paris.

Thanks to the cheapness of coal and an intelligent culture, grapes from the north travel now southwards, in a contrary direction to ordinary fruit. They cost so little that in May, English and Jersey grapes are sold at 1s. 8d. per lb. by the gardeners, and yet this price, like that of 40s. thirty years ago, is only kept up by slack production.

In March, Belgium grapes are sold at from 6d. to 8d., while in October, grapes cultivated in immense quantities — under glass, and with a little artificial heating in the environs of London — are sold at the same price as grapes bought by the pound in the vineyards of Switzerland and the Rhine, that is to say, for a few halfpence. Yet they still cost two-thirds too much, by reason of the excessive rent of the soil and the cost of installation and heating, on which the gardener pays a formidable tribute to the manufacturer and middleman. This being understood, we may say that it costs “next to nothing” to have delicious grapes under the latitude of, and in our misty London in autumn. In one of the suburbs, for instance, a wretched glass and plaster shelter, 9 ft. 10 in. long by 6½ ft. wide, resting against our cottage, gave us about fifty pounds of grapes of an exquisite taste in October, for nine consecutive years. The crop came from a Hamburg vine-stalk, six years old. And the shelter was so bad that the rain came through. At night the temperature was always that of outside. It was evidently not heated, for that would be as useless as to heat the street! And the cares to be given were: pruning the vine half an hour every year; and bringing a wheelbarrowful of manure, which is thrown over the stalk of the vine, planted in red clay outside the shelter.

On the other hand, if we estimate the amount of care given to the vine on the borders of the Rhine or Lake Leman, the terraces constructed stone upon stone on the slopes of the hills, the transport of manure and also of earth to a height of two or three hundred feet, we come to the conclusion that on the whole the expenditure of work necessary to cultivate vines is more considerable in Switzerland or on the banks of the Rhine than it is under glass in London suburbs.

This may seem paradoxical, because it is generally believed that vines grow of themselves in the south of Europe, and that the vinegrower’s work costs nothing. But gardeners and horticulturists, far from contradicting us, confirm our assertions. “The most advantageous culture in England is vine culture,” wrote a practical gardener, editor of the “English Journal of Horticulture.” Prices speak eloquently for themselves, as we know.

Translating these facts into communist language, we may assert that the man or woman who takes twenty hours a year from his leisure time to give some little care — very pleasant in the main — to two or three vine-stalks sheltered by simple glass under any European climate, will gather as many grapes as their family and friends can eat. And that applies not only to vines, but to all fruit trees.

The Commune that will put the processes of intensive culture into practice on a large scale will have all possible vegetables, indigenous or exotic, and all desirable fruits, without employing more than about ten hours a year per inhabitant.

In fact, nothing would be easier than to verify the above statements by direct experiment. Suppose 100 acres of a light loam (such as we have at Worthing) are transformed into a number of market gardens, each one with its glass houses for the rearing of the seedlings and young plants. Suppose also that 50 more acres are covered with glass, houses, and the organization of the whole is left to practical experienced French maraîchers, and Guernsey or Worthing greenhouse gardeners.

In basing the maintenance of these 150 acres on the Jersey average, requiring the work of three men per acre under glass — which makes less than 8,600 hours of work a year — it would need about 1,300,000 hours for the 150 acres. Fifty competent gardeners could give five hours a day to this work, and the rest would be simply done by people who, without being gardeners by profession, would soon learn how to use a spade, and to handle the plants. But this work would yield at least — we have seen it in a preceding chapter — all necessaries and articles of luxury in the way of fruit and vegetables for at least 40,000 or 50,000 people. Let us admit that among this number there are 13,500 adults, willing to work at the kitchen-garden; then, each one would have to give 100 hours a year distributed over the whole year. These hours of work would become hours of recreation spent among friends and children in beautiful gardens, more beautiful probably than those of the legendary Semiramis.

This is the balance sheet of the labour to be spent in order to be able to eat to satiety fruit which we are deprived of to-day, and to have vegetables in abundance, now so scrupulously rationed out by the housewife, when she has to reckon each halfpenny which must go to enrich capitalists and landowners [10].

If only humanity had the consciousness of what it CAN, and if that consciousness only gave it the power to will!

If it only knew that cowardice of the spirit is the rock on which all revolutions have stranded until now.
VI

We can easily perceive the new horizons opening before the social revolution.

Each time we speak of revolution the worker who has seen children wanting food lowers his brow and repeats obstinately — “What of bread? Will there be sufficient if everyone eats according to his appetite? What if the peasants, ignorant tools of reaction, starve our towns as the black bands did in France in 1793 — what shall we do?”

Let them do their worst! The large cities will have to do without them.

At what, then, should the hundreds of thousands of workers, who are asphyxiated to-day in small workshops and factories, be employed on the day they regain their liberty? Will they continue locking themselves up in factories after the Revolution? Will they continue to make luxurious toys for export when they see their stock of corn getting exhausted, meat becoming scarce, and vegetables disappearing without being replaced?

Evidently not! They will leave the town and go into the fields! Aided by a machinery which will enable the weakest of us to put a shoulder to the wheel, they will carry revolution into previously enslaved culture as they will have carried it into institutions and ideas.

Hundreds of acres will be covered with glass, and men, and women with delicate fingers, will foster the growth of young plants. Hundreds of other acres will be ploughed by steam, improved by manures, or enriched by artificial soil obtained by the pulverization of rocks. Happy crowds of occasional labourers will cover these acres with crops, guided in the work and experiments partly by those who know agriculture, but especially by the great and practical spirit of a people roused from long slumber and illumined by that bright beacon — the happiness of all.

And in two or three months the early crops will relieve the most pressing wants, and provide food for a people who, after so many centuries of expectation, will at least be able to appease their hunger and eat according to their appetite.

In the meanwhile, popular genius, the genius of a nation which revolts and knows its wants, will work at experimenting with new processes of culture that we already catch a glimpse of, and that only need the baptism of experience to become universal. Light will be experimented with — that unknown agent of culture which makes barley ripen in forty-five days under the latitude of Yakutsk; light, concentrated or artificial, will rival heat in hastening the growth of plants. A Mouchot of the future will invent a machine to guide the rays of the sun and make them work, so that we shall no longer seek sun-heat stored in coal in the depths of the earth. They will experiment the watering of the soil with cultures of micro-organisms — a rational idea, conceived but yesterday, which will permit us to give to the soil those little living beings, necessary to feed the rootless, to decompose and assimilate the component parts of the soil.

They will experiment.... But let us stop here or we shall enter into the realm of fancy. Let us remain in the reality of acquired facts. With the processes of culture in use, applied on a large scale, and already victorious in the struggle against industrial competition, we can give ourselves ease and luxury in return for agreeable work. The near future will show what is practical in the processes that recent scientific discoveries give us a glimpse of. Let us limit ourselves at present to opening up the new path that consists in the study of the needs of man, and the means of satisfying them.

The only thing that may be wanting to the Revolution is the boldness of initiative.

With our minds already narrowed in our youth, enslaved by the past in our mature age and till the grave, we hardly dare to think. If a new idea is mentioned — before venturing on an opinion of our own, we consult musty books a hundred years old, to know what ancient masters thought on the subject.

It is not food that will fail, if boldness of thought and initiative are not wanting to the revolution.

Of all the great days of the French Revolution, the most beautiful, the greatest, was the one on which delegates who had come from all parts of France to Paris, worked all with the spade to plane the ground of the Champ de Mars, preparing it for the fête of the Federation.

That day France was united: animated by the new spirit, she had a vision of the future in the working in common of the soil.

And it will again be by the working in common of the soil that the enfranchized societies will find their unity and will obliterate hatred and oppression which had divided them.

Henceforth, able to conceive solidarity — that immense power which increases man’s energy and creative forces a hundredfold — the new society will march to the conquest of the future with all the vigour of youth.

Leaving off production for unknown buyers, and looking in its midst for needs and tastes to be satisfied, society will liberally assure the life and ease of each of its members, as well as that moral satisfaction which work gives when freely chosen and freely accomplished, and the joy of living without encroaching on the life of others.

Inspired by a new daring — thanks to the sentiment of solidarity — all will march together to the conquest of the high joys of knowledge and artistic creation.

A society thus inspired will fear neither dissensions within nor enemies without. To the coalitions of the past it will oppose a new harmony, the initiative of each and all, the daring which springs from the awakening of a people’s genius.

Before such an irresistible force “conspiring kings” will be powerless. Nothing will remain for them but to bow before it, and to harness themselves to the chariot of humanity, rolling towards new horizons opened up by the Social Revolution.


Mindful
ness
Meditation for Beginners
PAGE
| 
i
Table of Contents
Living Mindfully
................................
................................
................................
................................
.....
1
Sitting Mindfully
................................
................................
................................
................................
.
8
Mindful Breathing
................................
................................
................................
...............................
8
Mindful Sensations
................................
................................
................................
.............................
9
Mindful Hearing
................................
................................
................................
................................
..
9
Mindful Thoughts and Emotions
................................
................................
................................
........
9
Choiceless Awareness
................................
................................
................................
.........................
9
Mindful Life Design
................................
................................
................................
.............................
17
Part I 
-
Inventory
................................
................................
................................
...............................
17
Part II 
-
Design
................................
................................
................................
................................
..
19
Cultivating 
Compassion
................................
................................
................................
........................
21
Your Mindfulness Journal
................................
................................
................................
.....................
22
Mindful
ness of Breathing
................................
................................
................................
.....................
23
Journal for Mindful Breathing
................................
................................
................................
..........
23
Mindful
ness of
Walking
................................
................................
................................
.......................
24
Sittin
g Meditation
Instructions
................................
................................
................................
..............
25
Sitting Meditation Journal
................................
................................
................................
.................
27
For more mindfulness meditations, visit 
MindfulnessExercises.com
Mindful
ness
Meditation for Beginners
PAGE
| 
i
Living Mindfully 
First and foremost, I’d like to congratulate you on your decision to enhance your personal growth 
through mindfulness. Try to keep in mind that this is something you are doing for yourself and your 
well
-
being, so it’s important for you to put in the effort
and make a commitment to schedule formal 
times to practice these exercises just as you would other important appointments. 
Believe me, I know that sometimes it is easier said than done. It is not uncommon to lose enthusiasm 
and dedication to a new practi
ce when obstacles arise and daily tasks begin to get in the way; as you 
continue on it’s important for you to figure out what is working and what’s not so that you can adjust 
your practice, as needed.  
Before beginning mindfulness practices, it is imperat
ive to understand the concept of mindfulness and 
what the practice of mindfulness can mean for you in your efforts towards personal growth.  
Mindfulness practice often embodies eight attitudes and it’s these attitudes below that contribute to the 
growth a
nd flourishing of your mind, heart and body. 
1.
Learner’s Mind
–
Seeing things as a visitor in a foreign land, everything is new and curious. 
2.
Nonjudgmental
–
Becoming impartial, without any labels of right or wrong or good or bad.  
Simply allowing things to
be. 
3.
Acknowledgment
–
Recognizing things as they are. 
4.
Settled
–
Being comfortable in the moment and content where you are. 
5.
Composed
–
Being equanimous and in control with compassion and insight. 
6.
Letting be
–
Letting things be as they are with no need t
o change them. 
7.
Self
-
reliant
–
Deciding on your own, from your own experiences, what is true or not. 
8.
Self
-
compassionate
–
Loving yourself as you are with no criticism or self
-
reproach. 
Take a moment to examine these attitudes in regard to your current st
ate of mind.  Write down the 
attitudes you wish to cultivate more of in your mindfulness practice. 
Mindful
ness
Meditation for Beginners
PAGE
| 
1
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__
________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
____________
______________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
______________________
____________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________
___________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________
_________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
_______________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________
Mindful
ness
Meditation for Beginners
PAGE
| 
2
Cultivating Compassio
n
Compassion, my friends, is a major part of being mindful. 
Can you envision a state of mind where there is no harsh, condemning judgment of yourself or of others? 
This state of mind does not view the world in terms of good and evil or right and wrong; it sees only 
“suffering and no suffering.” What would happen if
we did not judge any of the things that we see? We 
would see things that bring happiness and things that bring pain but we would not see fear, guilt or 
shame.  Wouldn’t it be remarkable if we saw the world this way?  When we only see suffering and no 
suff
ering, we feel compassion.  
Compassion can lead to forceful action without judgment.  For example, if we see a small child reaching 
for a cup filled with hot coffee, we instantly respond. This response is born out of the compassion we 
feel; we move to kee
p the child from harm, without any judgment. 
Compassion is the ability to feel someone else’s experiences and wish them to be free from pain.  To 
view life compassionately, we have to look beyond the end result of what is happening now, and look 
at the un
derlying conditions that caused the end result.   If you have insight into someone’s history you 
may realize past events cause them to behave in a certain way.  Then you can see the conditions that 
led up to that situation, not just the end result of those
conditions.
For example, two people, a man and a woman, both suffered childhood abuse.  The woman grew up to 
be fearful; the man grew up to be angry.  As adults they found themselves working together and the 
fearful woman disliked the angry man 
–
until sh
e gained some insight to his background and realized 
he had suffered the same as she had.
This kind of understanding does not mean that we condone a person’s negative behavior but it does 
mean that we can acknowledge the underlying factors that make up tha
t person’s life opening us up to 
compassion and forgiveness. Think of someone that you have had a problem with in the past.   Can you 
look beyond the problem and see that underlying conditions may have caused that person to react 
negatively 
–
or perhaps un
derlying conditions caused you to react negatively.  Can you view the 
situation with compassion and forgiveness? 
Mindful
ness
Meditation for Beginners
PAGE
| 
21
Your Mindfulness Journal 
When practicing mindfulness for the first time, write down anything that comes up emotionally, 
physically and ment
ally for you. 
_________________________________________________________________________________
 

 

nheykundamentalsjot;
Meditationieractice

by Ting Chen

Translated by Dharma Master Lok To

 

E-mail: bdea@buddhanet.net
Web site: www.buddhanet.net

Buddha Dharma Education Association Inc.

 

 
The Fundamentals
of
Meditation Practice

by Ting Chen
warts
es

.
1 a \
7 -s

Wf ii

Translated by Dharma Master Lok To
Edited by Sam Landberg & Dr. Frank G. French

2
Transfer-of-Merit Vow (Parinamana)
For All Donors

May all the merit and grace gained from adorning
Buddha’s Pure Land, from loving our parents, from
serving our country and from respecting all sen-
tient beings be transformed and transferred for the
benefit and salvation of all suffering sentient be-
ings on the three evil paths. Furthermore, may we
who read and hear this Buddhadharma and, there-
after, generate our Bodhi Minds be reborn, at the
end of our lives, in the Pure Land.

Sutra Translation Committee of the United States and Canada,
1999 — website: http://www.ymba.org/freebooks_main.html (U1

Acknowledgments We respectfully acknowledge the assistance,
support and cooperation of the following advisors, without whom
this book could not have been produced: Dayi Shi; Chuanbai Shi;
Dr. John Chen; Amado Li; Cherry Li; HoiSang Yu; Tsai Ping Chiang;
Vera Man; Way Zen; Jack Lin; Tony Aromando; and Ling Wang.

They are all to be thanked for editing and clarifying the text,
sharpening the translation and preparing the manuscript for
publication. Their devotion to and concentration on the completion
of this project, on a voluntary basis, are highly appreciated.

3
Contents

¢ Translator’s Introduction....................5. 5

¢ The Foundation of Meditation Practice.. 9

¢ The Levels of Buddhist Discipline......... 16
¢ Preparing For Meditation..................06. 19
¢ Regulating The Mind..................c.cccceeee 56
¢ Counting The Breath ......................ce. 74
¢ Varieties Of Ch’an.........cccceccceeeeeeeeeees 81
© GIOSSALY.... 0... cece ceccc cece eecceeeeaceeeeeeeeeeeeees 89
Translator’s Introduction

| content | next |

Originally, one’s own mind and nature are pure, and
there is nothing to accept and nothing to refuse; there
is neither existence nor non-existence; there is only
clear understanding without attachment and with no
dwelling. One who wants to know the no-attachment,
no-dwelling mind can find it through meditation,
because it is only then that the mind does not think of
right and wrong, of good and evil or of self and others.

If this seems obscure, then consider the following: The
past is already gone; when you do not think of it, the
thought of the past is gone, too. Then, there is no past
nor any thought of the past. Furthermore, the future
has yet not arrived. If you do not wish for nor seek
after it, the thought regarding the future vanishes.
Then, there is no future nor any thought about the
future. Finally, the present is already present. Without
grasping at it or dwelling upon it and without there
being any thought about it, the thought of the present
disappears, and there is no present nor any thought of
the present. The mind that does not dwell on anything
whatsoever is known as the True Mind or Original
Nature.
The non-dwelling mind is the mind of the Buddha, it is
the mind of liberation, it is the mind of Bodhi, and it is
the mind of non-birth. So, if you really want medita-
tion to come about, sit properly erect and close your
eyes. Then purify your mind, lay down everything and
think of neither good nor evil. Just observe your
thoughts. As you look for their place of origin, you
discover that they suddenly rise up and just as sud-
denly disappear, and that this process goes on and on.
Be patient and continue to observe them, and you will,
in time, know the thoughts to be devoid of any self-
nature; also you will, thereby, know original empti-
ness. Do not attempt to follow the thoughts, to trace
them in any way or have any intention of getting rid of
them, and, in time, awareness will manifest as your
mind illumines a thought. Then, there will suddenly be
a stillness that becomes suchness. At some point,
another thought will arise, and you will observe it in
the same way.

Do this at least once a day, sitting from fifteen minutes
to an hour. As your concentration deepens, your
thoughts slow down and diminish in number, and your
power of illumination increases until you eventually
find out that not a single thought arises. Then, there 1s
only stillness and voidness, for then the mind is clear

6
and pure. This is your self-nature as known directly
through wisdom (Prajna).

The subject of wisdom is Prajna, and the opposite of
Prajna is ignorance. Prajna illuminates the delusion
that is ignorance. With continued exposure to Prajna,
ignorance wears away bit by bit until there is a return
to self-nature, or pure mind. It is in this situation that
Right Thought manifests. There is no longer the dual-
ity of subject/object. This state is also known as no-
thought or suchness and is also referred to as the
inconceivable. When the mind is illumined and a
thought, as one ordinarily knows it to be, arises, it
dissolves instantly. Continue to practice in this way on
a daily basis, and you will notice your self-nature
getting steadily clearer and purer. Then there will be
no longer any need to observe, nor will there be any
purpose to observe. Indeed, there will be no longer any
need of any kind. It will be realized that mind is no-
mind, that no-mind is pure mind and that pure mind is
the true mind. At that time, the sound of discussion
and the role of thought will be finished. It cannot be
expressed in words, and yet it 1s as simple as drinking
water and knowing whether it is cold or warm. It is
called Sudden Enlightenment.
It is my express wish that this guide, based on the
meditation manual of Ting Chen, will prove helpful in
imparting the Dharma to its readers. In helping me
reach this goal, I wish to thank Sam Langberg and Dr.
Frank G. French, without whose help regarding fine
points in the translation and without whose editorial
acuteness this task might have proved too difficult.
May this work, then, help everyone to generate the
Bodhi Mind and never to regress.

Dharma Master Lok To

Young Men’s Buddhist Association of America
Bronx, New York

May 1999

(Buddhist Year: 2543)
The Foundation Of
Meditation Practice

| previous | content | next |

Why Meditate?

When you are caught up in the emotional upheaval of
greed, anger and delusion, you may find yourself
succumbing to some very real physical ailments; and
when you are ill, the world may seem to be a very
dismal place. That is not to say, however, that all of
our illnesses are due to extreme emotions. Exposure to
substances to which you may be allergic can alter
everything about you. It can cause violent mood
swings, depression, hallucinations and all sorts of
physical effects, including actual tissue damage. What-
ever the cause, disease is most often accompanied by
an assortment of disruptive emotions. Programs that
have been designed to make therapeutic use of relaxa-
tion methods and meditation have proved to be effec-
tive in curbing both the physical effects and the emo-
tions which accompany them. Yet, as beneficial as
they may be, such methods can take one only so far.
In the Buddhist tradition, meditation is used to defuse
the source of all the trouble-the illusion of self and
other. In Ch’an (or Zen), the aim is to overcome
thought and defilement. Having done this, and with
thoughts no longer stirring, the real substance of mind
becomes evident. Without thoughts and without the
illusion of self and other, greed, anger and hatred have
no place to arise; and the energy that was tied up by
those illusions becomes available, helping to provide
an overall improvement in health. That is why medita-
tion is called The Fundamental Practice.

The Psychophysiological Effects Of Meditation

The Russian physiologist, Ivan Pavlov (1849-1936),
emphasized the role that the cerebrum plays in physi-
ology. At first glance, one might assume this to be
merely a statement of fact, because that part of the
brain is usually thought to involve little else other than
thinking. Actually, it takes part in the production of
many hormones, both directly and indirectly. Every
aspect of a person is interrelated, and that 1s how and
why thoughts and emotions can have such far-reaching
effects. That is, however, also why meditation and
calm-inducing thoughts can be so stabilizing and so
healthy. One can safely assume, then, that most of

10
what contributes to proper functioning also contributes
to good health.

Useful Hints For Better Practice And Better Health

As you progress in your practice, you are required to
sit motionless for longer and longer periods of time at
a stretch. It is then that some very important physical
limitations may oblige you to make some adjustments
in the way that you sit. Should you choose to ignore
them, thinking that there is just one right way to prac-
tice, you may cause yourself needless pain and distrac-
tion (which means that you will not be able to concen-
trate); and you may possibly expose yourself to
irreparable physical damage as well.

It is not unusual for people who have gone on retreats
to return with painfully damaged knees, having held a
position in spite of pain and having welcomed an
ensuing numbness, simply because they have more
trouble than they can remedy. To paraphrase The
Kalama Sutra, “Do not do something because you
have been instructed to do so, but try it and find out
how it works for you.” Be always on guard for what
doesn’t seem to be quite right, and see what might be
done about it. There are many, many methods that can

11
be tried. There is no reason to have to submit to pain or
outright debility, especially when nothing good can
come of it.

The Relationship Between Mind And Meditation

The metaphor of the mirror, often referred to in Ch’an,
is most suitable here in pointing out the most salient
aspects of meditation as practiced in this tradition. The
mirror-mind does not respond at all, and it is by this
lack of agitation that all things are clearly known. This
is how the mind is said to be when there is no clinging.
The mind, to be like a mirror, must be passive, de-
tached, uninterested and quiet. It is a time of rest,
recuperation and of learning to be undefiled in the
midst of what is normally defiling. When there is no
perturbation in the mind, just as when there are no
ripples on the surface of a lake, all things are mirrored
clearly, leaving no trace. There are no intentions, and
there is no action to be taken or not taken. There is no
dependence upon anything that you do or do not do.
Meditation just unfolds naturally as the mind grows
tranquil.

12
Concentration

If you make the sun’s rays converge, using a magnify-
ing glass, and focus the resulting point of light onto a
sheet of paper, you can easily burn a hole through it.
Similarly, when you concentrate your thoughts, you
are empowered in many ways. A lay Buddhist, Yang
Jen San, once found a copy of The Surangama Sutra
in an old bookstore. He was overjoyed. It was just
what he had been looking for. He sat down and read
and read in complete absorption, oblivious to his
surroundings, until someone called him. Suddenly he
noticed it had become dark and that if he wanted to
continue, he would have to light a lamp. Wondrous
things must happen in deep concentration, for he had
been reading in the dark! A very famous writer of the
Sung Dynasty, Su Dong Pu, recounted a similar ex-
perience in which he was so deeply engrossed in
painting a picture that he was no longer aware of his
person nor of anything else. It is as though where
wholehearted application is directed, the whole world
must step aside.

As your concentration strengthens, your breathing
slows down and becomes subtle; areas of residual
tension relax, perhaps after having existed there for a
very long time, and there is no effort. A feeling of

13
well-being and ease ensues. Sustained, relaxed concen-
tration of this type easily becomes meditation. Unfold-
ing naturally, if allowed to continue, 1t improves one’s
health and vitality, as stultified emotions and their
physical concomitants give way to healing. The health-
enhancing benefits of meditation are now a matter of
record, and numerous physicians include it in pro-
grams for their patients’ recoveries.

The average person’s mind is in turmoil. He or she 1s
the product of deep-rooted patterns of thought result-
ing from karma accumulated since time immemorial,
as well as being tortured by the illusion of self. To be
enlightened is to be free of all of that. Concentration
already reduces the turmoil by limiting one’s attention
to just one thing. Through this practice, the apparent
hold that you have on your illusion of self and things
gives way until there is meditation. Then, there is an
absence of thought and an absence of words. Then,
without the stress and the strain of delusion, a very
deep sort of healing takes place.

Meditation And Dhyana

In Buddhism, the ordinary man is seen as leading a life
steeped in suffering through the defilements of greed,

14
anger and delusion. It is only when he finds out, first-
hand, that there is, indeed, nothing that he does that is
free of defilement and suffering and that there is a way
out of it all, that he may become sufficiently well-
motivated to gain that freedom. This is traditionally
likened to the discovery that the pretty, colored rope
that one has found and treasures is actually a very
poisonous snake. When that is your experience, you
may have such a profound understanding of Buddha-
dharma that your life will turn around radically. You
may realize beyond all doubt that, though the body
may be strong and healthy, it still changes and grows
old. You may realize deeply, by breaking off attach-
ment to both body and mind, that birth, death, and
defilement also no longer exist. In the Ch’an tradition,
this is discovered through meditation.

Discipline (sila), and wisdom (prajna) are closely
related to meditation (dhyana). Proper discipline leads
to dhyana, and dhyana gives rise to wisdom. It is by
means of discipline that the defilements are dispelled,
and this eases the way for the cultivation of dhyana
(established in the same region as prajna). The great
Ch’an Ting (Chinese for dhyana-related meditative
practice) is said to be secluded from defilement and
suffering as the result of self-discipline. To free one-

15
self from defilements is the main purpose of the prac-
tice of pure discipline. By means of discipline, defile-
ments are dispelled. Then, dhyana can become estab-
lished; defined variously as voidness, the absence of
subject and object, Ch’an Ting, or that which is not of
the flow of suffering, it is the access route to wisdom

(prajna).

The Levels Of Buddhist Discipline

| previous | content | next |

Also Known as Cumulative Discipline

Formally stated, the sevenfold assembly consists of the
upasaka (male lay devotee), upasika (female lay
devotee) siksamana (female candidate for novitiate),
sramanera (novice monk), sramanerika (novice nun),
(fully ordained monk), and bhikhuni (fully ordained
nun). These terms designate levels of commitment to
practice, starting with the basic five precepts, or train-
ing rules, for laity.

Not formally stated, but of equal importance, is the
vow to do good and refrain from doing evil. One’s

16
actions should always be for the benefit of all sentient
beings. The thrust of Buddhist discipline is a blameless
coexistence with the rest of the world, as well as
improved mindfulness and inner peace. There are two
ways to uphold the precepts. One 1s called stop and
hold, which means that one should stop, or refrain
from doing evil, and hold to the precepts. The second
one is called to do and to hold. This simply means that
you should do good and abide by the discipline. The
discipline has the function of helping you avoid evil
and do good, and upholding it enables you to purify
your body and mind. While that is being accom-
plished, the outflow of impurities, or asrava, dimin-
ishes; and these conditions, in turn, facilitate samadhi.

Dhyana is absorption meditation at varying levels;
when extended over long periods of time, it is some-
times referred to as samadhi. These levels (usually
four) are accounted for in Ch’an practice, and there
are, aS well, several different kinds of Ch’an. There
are, for example, mundane Ch’an, supra-mundane
Ch’an, and the Ch’an of the highest Mahayana realiza-
tion, to mention only three.

Meditation can be practiced while sitting, standing,
walking or lying down and anywhere in between; but
because our minds are ordinarily so very disorganized,

17
the best way to practice for most of us is to sit regu-
larly in a quiet place. Having seated yourself, simply
put everything else aside and concentrate on whatever
your object of concentration may be. With your mind,
speech and action already cooled down through disci-
pline, there is occasion for natural and steady access to
samadhi. When no thought arises, the pure substance
of mind appears; and the state of stillness and illumina-
tion gradually manifests itself.

The quality of that stillness 1s undefinable, and yet it is
not as if the sitter were a statue carved from stone. In
this context, i/lumination is understood as awareness
without subject-object duality. There is no longer
someone being aware of something, and, consequently,
there is no need for thought or verbalization.

The early sages emphasized that a moment of medita-
tion honors Buddha more than building pagodas as
numerous as the sandgrains in the Ganges River. The
pagodas, it is argued, can be demolished, unlike the
one-pointed mind that transcends time and space.

It cannot be repeated often enough that very little can
be achieved without observing the precepts. Indeed,
discipline dispels the attachment and the suffering that
accompany it and leads to the passionless, pure path to

18
Nirvana. Anasrava, or passionless purity, is the oppo-
site of asrava, the outflow of the passions and their
filth. Asrava is further known as the discharge of
mind-energy leading to the loss of truth. Anasrava, by
definition, means the absence of outflow and seclusion
from the stream of passion and, thus, from the stream
of suffering.

Preparing For Meditation

| previous | content | next |

The Posture

Find an uncluttered, well-ventilated (non-drafty), quiet
place where you can sit undisturbed on a regular
schedule. You may use a cover to protect yourself
from the cold.

In the beginning, let comfort be your guide. Make sure
you set up a schedule you can live with, and then keep
to it faithfully. Adjust your sittings so that there is no
excess of discomfort or pain, which includes finding a
posture you can hold for a period of time that you will

19
gradually extend. Learn to relax completely; do not try
to control anything, and do not expect anything.

Make sure the garments you wear are comfortable and
loose, and wear as few of them as circumstances
permit. Loosen your belt or whatever might be binding
or distracting, such as a wristwatch, jewelry or scent.
There 1s actually no need for adornments, and their use
during meditation should be avoided.

The Legs

If, and only if; you can manage it, sit on the full-lotus,
which is the traditional position considered most
stable. For those who might want to try the full-lotus
position, do as follows. First, sit on the floor or a low
cushion and fold your right leg in front of you, pulling
it in close to your groin. Next, fold your left leg over it,
with your left foot resting, sole upward, on your right
thigh and close to your groin. Finally, lift your right
foot, sole up, onto your left thigh, bringing it in close
to your groin. You may be able to maintain this posi-
tion for a short time at first, but, as you grow accus-
tomed to it, you may find it contributing greatly to a
sense of quiet, tranquillity and stability.

20
Sitting in the half-lotus position does not provide as
firm a base because only one knee is weighted down
by the opposite leg. To compensate for this, switch the
position of your legs, if you can, with each sitting. If
you find that this proves too difficult to do immedi-
ately, set aside time to gently lengthen the muscles of
your legs, hips and groin; but beware that you don’t
pull a muscle or injure yourself in your eagerness, or
you may have to take weeks to recuperate. Gradual,
steady practice is advised and works for most people if
they are loving, understanding and patient with them-
selves and, above all, if they are relaxed. Do not ever
force yourself into a position or hold it when it brings
on intense pain. It is not uncommon for misalignments
to develop by twisting at the waist in order to have
both knees touch the floor.

An effective way to help loosen the muscles that keep
your legs from settling down on either side of you, so
that they easily rest on the floor, can be done while
sitting in a meditation seat. Sit on the very edge of
your meditation seat with your feet placed shoulder-
width apart and with your knees positioned directly
over your ankles. Then lift one leg and rest the ankle of
that leg on the thigh of the other, allowing the knee of
the raised leg to descend out to the side as far as it can

21
comfortably go, supporting it with your hands and then
lifting it and lowering it over and over again. Each
time you lower it, think that leg is relaxing more. Then
set it again, and let go even more, trying to feel what
may be necessary to have this happen. Be sure your
hips remain level the whole time and that your legs
sink lower and lower on either side. Be aware of and
be mindful of everything that is happening in terms of
your thoughts and deeds during this simple exercise.
If, after your efforts, you cannot manage to sit com-
fortably in the full- or the half-lotus position, then you
may wish to try the “free” position.

Should pain develop, stay with it for awhile. Observe
it, rather than lamenting your lot or wishing you were
elsewhere, squirming, trying to escape or braving it out
while gritting your teeth. Staying with your pain, you
will soon clearly see how to succeed in your effort by
the way you sit, the way you breathe and/or by the way
you view the situation.

Borrowing from another source, we can take this
advice: “Be still and know.” Whatever comes, allow it
to happen. Do not avoid or reject, but take in whatever
is happening, including your way of coping. Even if
your reaction is to get out of the situation, providing
you become fully aware of what is happening, you are

22
no longer so thoroughly caught up in it. Be mindful of
what is happening in the present, for only you are in
touch with the events, their causes and conditions.

It may be beneficial for you to explore your response
when sending loving-kindness to yourself. It may feel
embarrassing, silly or unbecoming; you may even find
yourself inexplicably crying. As practiced in the
Theravada tradition, in combination with vipasyana,
the meditation on loving-kindness is simple and pro-
found, yet very effective, in reaching the sources of
our deep suffering. It is Dharma at its purest, inasmuch
as it addresses compassion as well as being intimate
with pain. Do you experience pain as if it were an
object outside of you, an intruder? This approach can
generate meaningful insights into the workings of your
mind and should be explored.

However, you should let discretion be your guide. Do
not submit to pain for the sake of absolving yourself of
a sense of guilt or to prove how well-intentioned or
how willing you are to endure torture. Consider it,
rather, to be an act of loving-kindness or as mindful-
ness practice. Either way, it is expedient. However, if
you find the pain too distracting, stretch out your legs
mindfully, take a rest and return to sitting. If you can
simply sit and not be involved in sitting correctly in

23
order to achieve something, you will find yourself
becoming increasingly quiet, your breath becoming
more subtle and your muscles becoming more relaxed;
then meditation ensues quite naturally.

Chest, Abdomen, Buttocks

Raise your chest a little, moving it forward, and sit so
that the hollow part of your chest, the part that is at
about the level of the base of your sternum (the den of
your heart), permits your diaphragm to function unim-
peded. Newcomers to meditation often experience
obstruction and discomfort in the chest, and that is
usually caused by the den of the heart not being low
enough. Should that occur, focus your awareness on
your abdomen and refrain from any effort; you should
feel relief in a short time. Your buttocks should be
protruding a little, and your back should be comforta-
bly, easily erect. Sit relaxed and self-composed, set-
tling into your lower abdomen. This practice has been
found to be especially calming.

Hands

Sitting in the half-lotus position, make sure your right
foot is on top of your left thigh. Your palms are turned

24
up, with the back of your right hand resting in the palm
of your left, while the back of your left hand rests at
about the level of your tan-t’ien (or the lower part of
your abdomen).

In the full-lotus position, the legs are crossed a little
above the ankles, with the left leg uppermost. Here, the
back of your left hand is cradled at the place where
your legs cross.

When these positions become natural and comfortable,
there is usually an accompanying sense of ease, silence
and tranquillity.

Natural Breathing

The abdomen relaxes and expands as you inhale and
contracts as you exhale. This is, indeed, natural; for
when you exhale, the diaphragm moves upward into
the chest, while the abdomen simultaneously contracts.
The contraction not only assists in evacuating the
lungs, but also stimulates blood circulating through the
organs contained in the abdominal cavity by compress-
ing the viscera.

25
Right Breathing

The abdomen is contracted as you inhale, and it relaxes
as you exhale. This sort of breathing has been used in
China since ancient times as a kind of physical and
mental hygiene. Try both methods to discover what-
ever advantages each seems to hold for you, the practi-
tioner, lest you get caught up in having to have things
happen in only a certain way.

Breathing Practice

While you are relaxed, 1t becomes profoundly evident
that breathing simply goes on and that there is the
knowing that 1t does. You can intentionally breathe in
a certain way, but the need for doing so is based upon
some external circumstances bringing about the need
for the intention, so that the matter of choice seems
somewhat obviated; thus, intention seems to come
about almost capriciously, in spite of yourself, as it
were. This paradox exists in everything that we do.
Meditation takes place in the absence of thought, and
yet we think that without thought there can be no
meditation. Perhaps the answer to this conundrum lies
in the sequence of two separate events rather than in
what seems their apparent opposition. For example,

26
when you are actively paying attention to your breath,
you cannot be calm; and so you are advised simply to
relax so calm can ensue. Meditation is distinguished by
absence of thought and a very characteristic sort of
breathing, neither of which can be brought about at
will. Control must first be relinquished. You circui-
tously bring that about by applying whatever you may
have discovered about relaxation, and that is the full
extent of exerting your will. The following rule holds
true, whether you practice natural breathing or right
breathing: When you sit down to meditate, sit easily
erect, breathing through your nose.

At first, your breathing may be rapid and shallow. As
you relax and have the attitude of neither accepting nor
rejecting whatever arises, your breathing slows down
and deepens until you find that you inhale and exhale,
in a cycle, once every minute. Ease may be conceived
of as the standard. At no time should anything feel
forced or uncomfortable; rather, it should all just
happen free of any concern on your part.

As you continue to sit, your breath grows finer and
finer. You should devote, at the very least, five min-
utes each morning and each evening to this breathing-
relaxation practice. Practice as often as you can during
the rest of the day, wherever and whenever you happen

27
to think of it. As the breath slows and becomes
increasingly subtle, the mind stabilizes and grows
calm. As the mind goes, so goes the breath. To illus-
trate this, four kinds of breath are noted as evolving in
the course of practice:

¢ The first 1s called windy breath to describe the
sound that you make as you breathe.

¢ The second is known as gasping breath. Here,
you no longer make any sound when you breath
but have the feeling that you cannot inhale
enough.

¢ In the third type of breathing, the breath is even
and silent and without any obstruction, but you
have yet to feel calm. This is called air breath.
These first three ways of breathing are still
rough-hewn and still show signs of unrest.

¢ When there is neither sound nor obstruction, nei-
ther roughness nor softness, and in that very
quiet time when you do not feel that you are
breathing at all and breathing evokes no
association of any kind, you have achieved the
fourth kind of breath, silent breath.

It is the breath that harmonizes. If you find that you
easily grow calm and that your breath quickly becomes

28
fine, this indicates that your mind is easily stabilized.
With continued practice, it may take only a few mo-
ments for your breath to be regulated, and then the
need to breathe will diminish and vanish; and, with
that, you will no longer be disturbed by anything. Your
mind, at this stage, is said to be quiet and stable. On
the way to this trouble-free state, however, there is
bound to be much discomfort and restlessness. If this
persists, and to help to harmonize the breath, you can
try the following methods, progressing from one to the
next as you grow proficient. Very relaxedly and un-
concernedly count from 1 to 10 in all of these exer-
cises:

¢ Count your breaths, calling one exhalation and
inhalation just one breath;

¢ Count only your inhalations;
¢ Count only your exhalations.

When you have reached ten, resume counting from
number one. Gradually, as your skill develops, you
will be able to count to one hundred in ten groups of
ten, without having your mind wander and without
dropping off to sleep. However, should that happen,
you are required to return to one and start all over
again. As you grow more at ease, your mind and breath

29
will, slowly and peacefully, become interdependent.
Confusion and sleepiness decrease in all three breath-
ing methods of concentration, and the mind 1s calmed
as well.

When the goals of breath-counting have been reached,
your next step will be to trace your breath. The mind,
by this time, will be very calm and very concentrated.
By tracing your breath, this calm and this concentra-
tion deepen until the breath is felt to enter and leave
through all of your pores. As you continue in this way,
you will come to experience yourself dissipating like a
cloud and melting away like a fog, until there is noth-
ing but voidness. When this happens, you find yourself
freed of all sorts of illness, as the mind is established
on a new, deeper level of quiet; and it is then that it 1s
time to dispense with the method of tracing the breath.

Regulating the Mind

Meditation can improve your health, but its primary
purpose is to enable you to be free of thought; because
when this has occurred, wisdom shines brightly. With
that aim in mind, then, we see that both counting the
breath and tracing the breath are methods of regulat-
ing the breath and thereby the mind. If you are fully

30
concentrated in this way, your thoughts are no longer
confused or disordered. That is why people who have
racing minds or who are involved in emotional turmoil
are assigned the simple task of counting their breaths.
It calms them in body, breath and mind. In body, they
grow relaxed and free of tension, the breathing slows
and deepens, and the mind grows quiet, calm and
unperturbed.

As one continues in this practice, all but the finer states
of mind disappear. Then, it is time to regulate the
mind, for now it has become much less erratic. There
are many methods of approach, but the one most
favored is to have one rest his or her attention on just
one point, and to consider any thoughts that arise to be
like actors that appear on a stage and then leave. This
attitude of passivity, of taking part less and less in
what is happening, leads to concentration. Therefore,
when you have succeeded in concentrating on the point
of your choice, you are also free of disturbing
thoughts; and, with continued concentration, the prac-
titioner finds, as well, that fewer disturbing thoughts
arise for the rest of the day. So, concentrate upon or
relaxedly be aware of the tip of your nose, your navel
or the point an inch and a half below it, in an area
known as the tan t’ien, because your mind needs

31
something to occupy it. Traditionally, in this practice
the mind is said to be like a monkey that has been
restricted to a small space, where it can no longer jump
and skip about.

Two things plague you most when you are preparing
the ground, as it were, from which meditation sprouts:

1. When you first sit down, your mind is restless and
unstable. You are pulled in all directions, eager to
succeed one moment and frustrated when things don’t
turn out the way you want the next. You may begin to
ache, first in one place and then in another, so that all
of your time is taken up trying to escape the pain or
consoling yourself, or both. You may imagine yourself
elsewhere, participating in events that have taken place
in your life, or that events that are somehow important
to you are taking place again. You may find yourself
dozing off over and over again.

2. Through continuing practice, your mind becomes
more settled, and discriminating thought diminishes;
but there is still confusion, and you easily tire and doze
off. It 1s to deal with these problems that you should
sense the point an inch and a half below your navel
and about an inch and a half in, which is in the area
called the tan t’ien. This will not only correct your

32
disordered thought and keep you from drifting off in
reverie, but it also has a recognized physiologically
stabilizing effect that results in mental and physical
health as well. Again, you have to find the point to
concentrate on that works for you. It might be the tip
of your nose, your navel or the point an inch and a half
below it. Whatever you choose to do, however, stay
with it for the duration of the time that you have set
aside for sitting. Beginners, especially, should make
their practice more successful by finding the time to
meditate when they are most alert, by eliminating
discomfort and distraction and, most of all, by under-
standing the purpose of it all.

Insight Meditation

The method of concentration described thus far, in
which you are to return to your object of concentration
when you discover that you are caught up in discrimi-
nating thought, is a shallow way to grow calm and to
stop wandering thoughts, because it involves thinking
about the thoughts that arise, which is like adding fuel
to a fire. It 1s not really a means of reaching calm, then,
and so you must eventually abandon that method and
take one more step to insight meditation. Ordinarily,
you use your eyes to look outside. In this approach,

33
you must literally put aside everything; close your eyes
and observe and/or feel your discriminating thoughts.
If you do, you will soon find you cannot hold onto
them, dissolve them or send them away. Once this is
deeply realized and you no longer struggle to hold onto
them, dissolve them or send them away, you will know
original stillness and emptiness. When this insight
develops and you reflect in this way on a thought that
arises, it quickly disappears and is replaced by void-
ness. This marks the creation of a radically new way in
which the mind can work.

When you first set out to meditate, it may seem that
your thought has lessened. After you have practiced
for awhile, however, you will most likely feel that it
has increased. What has actually increased is the
realization of what has really been so right along, and
this immediate and continuous source of suffering can
serve as a lighthouse in the treacherous waters of
samsara. This can be compared to not being aware of
the dust rising in a room until a shaft of sunlight shines
on it. In the same way, then, if you feel that you have
too much thought, it is the first step toward enlighten-
ment. Abandoning thought, persevering in the insight
that permits this and delighting in this, usually over a
long period of time, lead to a natural disappearance of

34
thought. There is, instead, stillness. As you continue in
this way, the stillness becomes more profound, for it
becomes a stillness in which sudden enlightenment can
occur.

Reciting the Name of Amitabha Buddha

As you may have realized, it is not unusual for
thoughts to assail you relentlessly when you sit down
to practice. Usually it is beyond your control, and,
even with the best of intentions, one might eventually
feel that there is no way to begin to practice. If you
find that is more the rule than not for you, you might
try the Pure Land approach, which is simply to recite
the name of Amitabha Buddha over and over again. It
is a very simple practice and can be very effective, but
it requires a deep faith and a strong vow to be able to
carry it out. However, if you sincerely recite the name
of Amitabha, so that there 1s no other thought in your
mind, and do this for some time, false thought will
diminish.

Ch’an Master Che-Wu said that when a pure pearl is
put into turbid water, the turbid water becomes pure.
Similarly, when Buddha’s name is put into a confused
mind, that mind becomes Buddha. Ideally, reciting

35
Amitabha Buddha should free you of defilements in
this very lifetime and assure your rebirth in the Pure
Land as a great, bright light in the Ocean of Suffering,
meriting praise for the Mahayana sutras and all the
patriarchs and Dharma Masters of the past. Should you
have any reservations about this practice, it must be
said that this simple act of reciting Amitabha 1s pro-
foundly Buddhist, because it engages body, speech and
mind in one concerted effort-the body by regulating
the breath; the speech by confining it to a simple
utterance; and the mind by a resolve which has been
made and a vow which has been taken.

There are variations on this theme, as it were. You can
recite aloud. You can recite silently. You can recite as
you inhale. You can recite as you exhale. You can
recite on both inhaling and exhaling. The rate at which
you practice varies according to your particular needs
and abilities, but this is true of any practice that you
might engage in. The recitation should, in any event,
proceed with the tranquillity that comes from mind and
breath depending on one another. As you continue in
this way, the mind grows calm and the breath becomes
shapeless. Then, it is as though only your original
intention or vow functions, the recitation continuing on
its own without disturbance or confusion until first the

36
stage of no-mind 1s reached and then that of no no-
mind 1s attained.

In The Sutra of Ch’an Samadhi it says that if a
Bodhisattva meditates with nothing but the Buddha in
mind, he obtains samadhi. This simple method of
reciting the Buddha’s name can rid you of discriminat-
ing thought, which 1s the false thought or the thinking
that the common man is plagued with, and reward you
with Right Wisdom; and because your breath is regu-
lated, your health is improved too.

It might help you to count your recitations. Again, you
can experiment to find out what works best for you.
Count with each cycle of breathing in and out, preced-
ing or following an exhalation; or just include it as part
of each recitation. The count, here, can be anything
that you decide upon, or you can simply continue to
count from | to 10, as before, repeating it over and
over. Or, again, you might even silently repeat your
recitation ten times with each breath or as many times
as you can. Any of the above approaches can help to
bring about effective concentration, the object of them
all being to provide you with something simple and
repetitious to fully occupy your mind without disturb-
ing it. You have to try it! You have to experiment with
it! That is to say, now that you know the way to pre-

37
pare a delicious and nutritious meal, you have to
actually prepare it, taste it, see whether it agrees with
you, improve on it, if need be, and then eat it until your
health improves. By analogy you must use this proce-
dure in your practice until the practice proceeds on its
own and becomes, therefore, no longer practice but an
art that seemingly has a life of its own.

During the T’ang Dynasty, Master Fei-Hsi composed a
sastra on The Reciting Buddha’s Name Samadhi
Sutra. In it, he said that people use rare jade, crystal,
diamonds or other precious things to make beads to
use 1n meditation but that he himself traces his inhala-
tions and exhalations (as they use beads) while reciting
Amitabha and that, furthermore, he can do it while
standing, sitting, lying down and even while in deep
slumber.

What To Be Mindful Of

Every moment of every day presents an opportunity
for meditation. However, you may feel that you are too
busy or that you need a structure. In that case, you
might try it upon arising in the morning and/or just
before retiring at night. If you can make the attempt
only once a day, experiment to find out what the best

38
time for you 1s, not only in regard to availability but
also in regard to the time when you feel most alert and
responsive to practice. Look for quality in the short
time set aside. In the beginning, especially, that time
should be regarded as a time of rest, of relaxation or of
unwinding. It is a time of not doing after all, a time of
not being actively engaged in anything. From the start,
then, find out how to let your practice proceed natu-
rally, rather than seeking to make things happen
through an act of determination. You might set aside
ten minutes within which to practice and then extend
the time a minute or two with each subsequent sitting,
until you are sitting for thirty or forty minutes at a
time; and you should find a place where you can be
assured that you can continue to do so at the same time
and place each day, because we are, very much, crea-
tures of habit. In fact, when you wake up, and while
you are still in bed, you should place your palms over
your solar plexus and then guide them slowly down to
your lower abdomen. Do this several times, and then
go to the bathroom to relieve yourself, brush your teeth
and bathe, and then sit down to practice. This routine
can be used at other times during the day as well, and,
when established, it becomes as natural as brushing
your teeth. What is most important, however, is that

39
you make it a living experience, a time of discovery
through relaxation and passive observation.

Eating is one of our earliest sources of conditioning,
and so part of your practice 1s to regard food as medi-
cine. This may seem to be a simple enough thing to do,
but it can prove to be very trying. For many, this
simple practice is thoroughly disruptive, producing
feelings of deprivation and anxiety when they no
longer have access to their private pacifiers or condi-
tioning. One of its purposes, however, 1s to reveal
those attachments, in order to discover the natural
inclination to be a part of them, and then have that
awareness evolve into freedom.

As to the procedure itself, do not eat directly before
you sit, because it may make you sleepy. If you have
eaten too much, you may be thoroughly distracted by
the discomfort of feeling full, perhaps even to the point
of finding it hard to breathe. However, not eating
enough has its disadvantages, too, making you feel
weak, have headaches and be incapable of concentra-
tion. You must learn to listen to your needs. You must
be aware of what happens to you all the time, so that
you can know the right food, the right amount of it to
eat and, also, discover how long to wait after having
eaten before sitting.

40
In this way, you may find that life takes on a sense of
order, that you are not so involved in eating anymore,
and, as a bonus perhaps, that you are losing weight.
With only the most superficial observation, you may
discover that eating as you do ordinarily may be fol-
lowed by a plethora of such symptoms as vague feel-
ings of unrest, headaches, depression, anxiety, stom-
achaches, muddled thinking, fatigue or itching. If you
can detect what the causes are, you may be able to rid
yourself of the symptoms. However, that may not
prove to be as easy as it may seem. There are many
kinds of addiction, but it is characteristic of them all,
according to a current theory regarding what is in-
volved in allergy, that you crave the very things that
cause your problems. Sitting passively aware of every-
thing that is transpiring, you relax. This not only serves
to reduce your reactions overall, but also helps you to
become less attached to things that have been troubling
you. You become aware of how everything has hap-
pened, and, by not acting on it, come to tune in to an
inner knowing that chimes 1n to help liberate you, as it
were. It cannot be said too often that you must find out
what is best for you. Some people require an empty
stomach. Others prefer to shower and meditate an hour
after eating lightly, and, to complicate matters, it may

41
not always work for them. It’s all there before one to
observe. All it takes is being aware of what’s happen-
ing all the time.

Anyone who has missed a night or two of sleep and
has had to work knows how miserable it can be just to
stay awake, let alone concentrate and, perhaps, do
physical labor as well. Sleeping too much can make
you feel sluggish, and so neither too much nor too little
sleep is good for meditation. So there it is again! It is
up to you, the practitioner, to find out what is best.
Then, once you have done that, you can work out a
schedule. For example, you might sit from nine to ten
in the evening, retiring directly afterwards. Arising at
six in the morning, you can go about your morming
ablutions and sit again before going out for the day.
Should you awaken at night and find that you are not
sleepy or that you have trouble falling asleep again,
you can use that time as an opportunity to meditate.
Sleep usually ensues as relaxation sets in. Should it
not, however, then simply continue to sit. With prac-
tice, your need for sleep diminishes, and you may find
that you can manage quite well on just four or five
hours, or even less. In fact, there are meditators on
record who no longer have any need to sleep but

42
meditate instead. This ability is not something that can
be forced or even learned but develops naturally.

Perseverance

Beginners often find that sitting practice is very un-
comfortable. In fact, some may even continue to feel
that way long past the time that they qualify as begin-
ners. What keeps them coming back is perseverance.
To make progress you must persevere, and you must
sit every day at the same time and in the same place,
relaxed and gently erect, simply aware of whatever is
happening or lightly engaged in concentration and free
of any sense of coercion.

Results

Looking for results is counterproductive. Ideally, all
thought falls away and is replaced by a natural state,
which, incidentally, proves to be healthy because it is
free of desire and, thus, relatively free of stress. Hav-
ing no aim is refreshing but is seldom understood, as
such, and difficult for most to come by. The desires to
do, to excel and to succeed are at the heart of one’s
very being. To relinquish such inclinations would
seem to be outside the scope of what one can do,

43
because it would take away the illusion of control.
That is why a correct understanding of the Dharma is
SO important.

No Concern

Drop all cares! Put away all things during your prac-
tice and simply regulate your breath and mind. Then,
even deluded thoughts are seen to come and go. Not
caring about them, your mind grows calm. Close your
eyes while sitting, and you won’t see outside things.
Sounds may still be evident, and you may feel that
they are disturbing and that your practice is difficult;
but in that very moment, if you are aware of what you
are thinking as just thinking or of what you are hearing
as just hearing, your problems, as such, drop away.

Habits

It is not really enough just to do sitting practice; and it
is certainly not enough if you are doing so only twice a
day. You must be attentive to your conduct and con-
stantly be on guard against falling into the trap of
habitual behavior. This means that you must recognize
and then seek to control your greed, anger and delu-
sion, that you should do good, take refuge in the Three

44
Treasures (Buddha, Dharma and Sangha), observe the
five precepts (not to kill, steal, commit adultery, lie or
ingest intoxicating substances), and that you should
read, study and inquire to make clear what you under-
stand of the Dharma to be able to set up and maintain
Right Understanding and Right View. In this way, you
can be more free of desire, be more able to concen-
trate, and, in time, have successful meditation take
place.

Experiences Likely to Arise

Do not be upset if, while practicing, you suddenly
grow very hot, perspire profusely, shake, perhaps even
violently, hear what seems like all-pervading sound,
find yourself assuming various positions without
intending to and, possibly, see apparitions. Do not
attempt to suppress any of these manifestations! How-
ever, most practitioners never have any such experi-
ences, but, on the contrary, practice successfully and
have the benefit of improved health as well. One might
wax mysterious and say that it is due to karma, al-
though that is really no more than saying that it is what
it is. It should suffice to say that meditation can some-
times be attended by mental, emotional and physical
effects that are transient, as long as there is no attempt

45
to stop them. Should they upset you, just understand
that everything is void and that even what seems to
exist changes constantly. Keep in mind that nothing 1s
real because nothing has any inherent nature; and so
there is nothing to crave or to reject. It is with such a
view that you may be free of grasping, and it is then
that concentration should easily ensue. Without such a
view, however, you are in danger of being trapped by
whatever may seem important to you.

Dharma Master Tao-Yuan, in describing his style of
practice, said that one who has prajna (wisdom)
should arouse great compassion and make a great vow
to attain samadhi, to convert sentient beings widely,
and not to seek salvation for himself. He must also
abandon all conditions, or, in other words, simply stop
doing anything at all, neither differentiating body and
mind nor motion and stillness. He should eat and sleep
just enough to sustain health, and he should set aside a
time and place to meditate each day, sitting in either
the full- or half-lotus position. Should he choose to sit
in the full-lotus, he should place his left foot on top of
his right thigh and his right foot on top of his left thigh.
Respectively, he should then place the back of his right
hand in the palm of his left and then put the back of his
left hand on his left foot in the half-lotus, or on his two

46
upturned feet in the full-lotus, touching his thumbs
together ever so lightly.

Having established a stable and comfortable base, he
should then lean forward and backward and sway from
right to left, slowly, diminishing the swings until he
finds a place of balance, where he feels that he is
sitting easily and without strain. To assure himself that
this is so, he can check to see if his ears are directly
over his shoulders and whether his nose is in line with
his navel. He should, however, not force himself to
assume and maintain a position that is not natural for
him. Should he want, eventually, to be able to sit
erectly, he should devote time to doing just that, as a
separate daily practice.

When he is then able to sit in that way without any
thought having to be given to it, he can incorporate it
into his concentration-practice time. He should then
touch the tip of his tongue to his palate, just behind his
upper front teeth and maintain this contact throughout
the entire time that he is sitting. To keep from falling
asleep, he has his eyes slightly open, directing his gaze
downward through the space permitted by his lowered
eyelids. Having so arranged himself, he sits, thinking
of neither good nor evil. Should any such thoughts

47
arise, however, he should be aware of them as simply
thoughts.

Practicing in this fashion over a period of time, he
naturally comes to be of one mind (a mind no longer
occupied with objects). When this stage has been
arrived at, the four elements — earth, water, fire, and
air — are said to be automatically at ease, and he has
reached the level of bliss. Becoming skilled in these
ways, he attains to what is described as great satisfac-
tion. If he is not so skilled, however, he is advised to
concentrate on the one mind until he is successful in
obtaining this satisfaction. When his practice period 1s
over and he is ready to get up, he moves slowly. Thus,
when he stands up, he does not disturb his deep con-
centration and can, in time, continue to maintain it at
all times and in all places, holding it as though it were
a small baby. As he continues in this way, the com-
plete strength of dhyana should eventually become
available to him.

It is easy to look for a pearl in calm water, but it is
very hard to do so when there are large waves. The
pearl of Mind appears, then, in the clear water of
dhyana. In The Complete Enlightenment Sutra, it is
written that Ch’an Ting (dhyana) gives rise to clear
wisdom that is free of all obstruction, that is beyond

48
everything, and that comes about more readily in the
calm of meditation.

A question in The Great Sastra asks why the Buddha
advises that one use only the lotus (or half-lotus)
position. His reply was that, of all the methods that
have been tried in meditation, the lotus position was
found to be the most secure and stable, enabling the
practitioner to sit for a long time without tiring; and so
it is ideal for practicing Ch’an. It has a way of putting
one’s mind in order, too, just as it arranges one physi-
cally. Of the four mind avenues of practice-sitting,
walking, standing and lying down-the lotus position is
supreme, contributing to the most proper demeanor for
practice.

There are heterodox practitioners who raise their feet,
stand up often or bare their feet. Such conceited fel-
lows exhibit unrest and cannot quiet their minds. This,
then, is another reason why one should sit in the lotus
position. Furthermore, sitting in this manner, it is
easier for one to develop correct thought and correct
concentration which can then lead to oneness of mind.
Elsewhere in The Great Sastra, it is also advised that
one who would learn to meditate should concentrate on
one point, which should be either between the eye-
brows or in the middle of the forehead.

49
The great T’ien-T’ai master, Chih-I, who taught Chih-
Kuan and methods of practice in Ch’an, described in
great detail how one should regulate one’s diet to be fit
to enter the Tao. Simply put, he said that if you eat too
much at one time, your stomach will be so full that you
will be unable to breath properly. This, in turn, will
cause your psychic centers to be blocked and your
mind to be obstructed, making it extremely difficult, if
not impossible, for you to practice. If, on the other
hand, you have not eaten enough, this can cause your
mind to be unsteady for want of energy. Naturally,
these extreme conditions are to be avoided, and they

suggest just two reasons why one should practice the
Middle Way.

Regarding your diet, avoid food that only you can
know is unsuitable for your practice, can keep the
elements in disharmony and can lead to illness. This is
a way of pointing out the practicality of being ever
mindful, for it is through such observation that you can
ultimately learn what is appropriate for you. It is not
unheard of that certain foods cannot only make one
feel out of sorts or ill, but also may cause one to have
sudden mood swings or even hallucinations. Hence,
the sutra says that if you are physically at ease, the Tao
can prosper, and that if food and drink are properly

50
regulated, happiness can be enjoyed in quiet and the
still mind can make a great show of zeal.

Regulating Sleep

It is said that overindulgence in sleep results from
ignorance, clouds the mind, and should be discour-
aged. He who sleeps too much will soon not only cast
aside his practice of Dharma but will also quickly lose
his ability to practice, as his mind becomes confused
and all his good roots come to no avail. Therefore, one
should awaken to the impermanence of life and regu-
late one’s sleep in order to keep one’s spirit high and
one’s mind clear for the purpose of abiding 1n the state
that leads to the manifestation of imperturbable still-
ness. Hence, it is further said that self-cultivation
should always go on and that excessive sleep should
not be allowed to cause one’s time to pass aimlessly.
One should think of the destructive fire of 1mperma-
nence that scorches the whole world and strive to be
liberated from it as soon as possible, instead of indulg-
ing oneself in excessive sleep.

51
Regulating Body, Breath and Mind

Body, breath and mind are all interdependent and are
sometimes conceived of as being aspects of the same
thing. In Buddhism, there are practices that have been
devised to work with these aspects. Also, there are
methods that are designed to take you through prelimi-
nary, intermediate, and final practices. These methods
and practices are employed to prepare you to enter into
and to come out of, some say, the heart of it all- medi-
tation.

Your everyday activity must have a gentle quality. If
there is any roughness to it, your breath 1s made rough
as well; and when your breath is rough, your mind 1s
unsettled, so that when you attempt to sit, you become
perplexed and uneasy. To remedy this, simply visual-
ize yourself as being already physically relaxed and
sitting at ease before you actually sit down to practice.
When the beneficial effects of this simple procedure
have manifested and you feel warm and relaxed and
gently present, you can arrange yourself in your cho-
sen sitting position.

What follows are directions for sitting in the half-lotus
position, as described by yet another teacher. Arrange
your cushions so that you can sit comfortably for a

52
long time. Then, position yourself in the half-lotus
position. To do this, sit upright with your knees out to
either side and your legs crossed at your ankles. Then
place your left lower limb on top of your right thigh
and slide your left lower leg in close to your lower
belly, so that the sole of your left foot is turned up and
the toes of your left foot are parallel to your right
thigh. The toes of your right foot are also arranged so
that they are parallel to your left thigh.

Should you want to sit in the full-lotus position, ob-
serve the above procedure; and then place your right
lower leg on your left, turning the sole of your right
foot up and drawing it in close to your lower belly.
Once settled, loosen your belt just enough to keep it
from slipping and then loosen anything else that might
be even slightly binding, like a wristwatch or a snug
collar. When you have done that, lay the back of your
left hand in the upturned palm of your right, and rest
the back of your right hand on the upturned soles of
your feet. Then check to see if you are leaning, slump-
ing or straining, and, having made whatever adjust-
ments you need, shake your limbs seven or eight times
to relax them. Then check again to see how you are
sitting, making sure that you are not slumped down or
sitting rigidly upright but are easily erect. Your head

53
should not jut forward or lean to one side or the other,
and your chin should not be vigorously pulled in. You
should feel that you are just sitting naturally. Then,
slowly and continuously exhale through your mouth,
while imagining that all the waste and impurities that
might be in your psychic centers are being expelled
along with your breath. Close your mouth, so that your
upper lip and teeth meet your lower ones and your
tongue touches your palate, and then close your eyes
and inhale clean air through your nostrils. Now, imag-
ine that you are a mountain, settled and immobile.
Sitting in this way, you can avoid both strain and
slackness.

Regulating The Breath

For meditation successfully to take place, the breath
must first be regulated. There are, traditionally, four
kinds of breath: audible, gasping, coarse and restful.
The first three are considered to be somewhat disrup-
tive. If you can hear your breath, it is said to be audi-
ble. If it is not audible, and is also obstructed or not
free, it is called gasping breath. If the breath is neither
audible nor fine, it is said to be coarse. When it is
neither audible nor gasping nor coarse, but continu-
ous, being barely perceptible and so fine that it 1s

54
almost imperceptible and also accompanied by comfort
and ease, it is called restful breath. An audible breath
scatters your composure; a gasping breath ties you up;
a coarse breath tires you; but a restful breath indicates
a quiet mind. If any of the first three ways of breathing
is present, it means that your breath is not yet regu-
lated.

Regulating the Breath: a Summary

There are three notable phases that take place during
the course of this practice:
¢ Concentrating properly, you relax.

¢ Your mind grows calm as you relax more and
more.

¢ You have the experience of breathing through
all your pores.

55
Regulating The Mind

| previous | content | next |

Entering Meditation

The purpose or goal, is to reduce confusion and think-
ing, to keep your attention from wandering and to
stabilize the mind when it starts sinking, floating,
straining or becoming too diffuse.

Sinking mind is dull, confused and untraceable. Even
dozing may occur. Therefore, to remedy this, you are
advised to fix your attention on the tip of your nose.

Floating mind drifts; you feel uneasy and are con-
cerned about externals. Therefore, you are advised to
fix your attention on your navel because this has been
found to keep thoughts from arising. This accom-
plished, the mind is said to be stabilized and is calmed
easily. It then becomes a regulated mind.

Sustained Meditation

Meditation ultimately is simply awareness without
intention. However, you are encouraged to be con-
stantly aware and to know whether your body, breath

56
and mind are properly regulated. If, after having regu-
lated your body and having sat for awhile, you notice
that your sitting has become strained or loose, that you
are inclined to one side, drooping, holding your shoul-
ders up or pulling them backward or forward, or that
you are somehow not just right, you should make the
proper adjustments in order to maintain a regulated
mind. It might be possible, however, that even though
your body is regulated, your breath is not, even after
you have already dealt with various unregulated as-
pects of the breath, which may be audible, gasping or
coarse. It may also happen that, even though the body
and breath are regulated, the mind is either floating,
sinking, loose, strained or unsettled, 1n which case the
methods mentioned earlier should then be used to
regulate the mind. Although these methods are to be
used expediently, rather than in succession, they may,
nevertheless, seem very willful. Actually, it is a little
like learning to ride a bicycle; once learned, it takes
care of itself.

Coming Out of Meditation

Before your meditation session is over, you should, in
a manner of speaking, put it aside and exhale, using
your mouth while visualizing the air leaving your

57
psychic centers. Then gently rotate your shoulders,
arms, hands, head and neck; next wiggle your toes to
relax them. Having done this, rub your body with your
hands, and then rub your palms together and put them
over your eyes, cupping them for a while. Finally
when you feel that you have cooled down sufficiently,
you can leave your seat. To come out of meditation
abruptly, even though everything may have been
stabilized while you were sitting, can cause headaches
and all sorts of illness.

The Practice of Chih-Kuan in Relation to Coarse
and Distracted Mind

When a beginner sits down to practice, his or her mind
is usually coarse and unsettled. Practicing Chih 1s
conducive to mind control, but, failing that, one can
switch to Kuan. Let us see what it all means.

The first approach, called Chih, has three components,
as follows:

1. According to the sutra, a fixed mind that cannot
stray is like a bound monkey. As applied to
practice, it means fixing your attention on the tip

of your nose, on your navel, or an inch and a
half below it.

58
2. The sutra further says that the five sense organs
are controlled by the mind. To stop a wandering
mind, you restrain it through observation as it
moves.

3. Understanding is of primary importance. Refer-
ring to the sutra again, we find that the causes
that create phenomena are ownerless and empty.
Whoever calms his/her mind, has the foundation
for monastic practice. Stopping all arising
causes and ensures the attainment of Absolute
Reality by means of the realization that all
things (dharmas) arise from the mind, that their
existence is due to circumstantial causes and that
they are devoid of separate self. If this 1s under-
stood, the mind will not grasp at anything, and
its stirred-up condition will simply come to a
complete stop. The term Chih means just that —
stopping.

The second approach, called Kuan, has two compo-
nents, as follows:

1. If you find yourself caught in sexual desire, for
example, you should cultivate the opposite view,
seeing sex as dirty and ugly. When you are con-
sumed with anger, you have to find a way to ex-
press compassion instead. The opposite of an at-

59
tachment to the ego’s concerns would be to call
to mind how everything 1s an illusion. When you
are deluged with thoughts, you count your
breaths. The effect of this strategy is, ultimately,
to call a halt to discrimination.

2. This consists of looking into the nature of things
and seeing that they have no inherent existence
and that their apparent existence is dependent
upon apparent causes, which, in turn, are de-
pendent upon past experiences and what 1s pre-
sumed to be present circumstances. In other
words, causes, also, have no inherent nature; and
so they are actually identical with the undiffer-
entiated reality from which they seemingly arise.
Since the objects, thus contemplated, are unreal,
it then follows that the mind which contem-
plated them will cease to arise.

The Chih-Kuan Dharma Gate

To recapitulate, remember that in order to prepare for
meditation you should sit properly and regulate your
breath to stabilize and control your mind. This requires
a great deal of patience for most practitioners because
the mind is, ordinarily, quite unruly. Not succeeding at
it should not keep you from doing Chih-Kuan, how-

60
ever; nor does it mean that you should quit your prac-
tice of regulating your body, speech and mind. As it 1s,
you soon discover that the mind’s activity is like a
monkey, never stopping for an instant. The advice that
is traditionally given is to limit this monkey’s move-
ment. The Chih, in Chih-Kuan means stopping and
refers to stopping the false or misleading activity of the
mind. To do this — 1.e., to tether the monkey mind by
practicing Chih — the first step is to fix the mind on a
single object to keep it from wandering from one
object to another. Having accomplished this, you look
within to contemplate your thoughts. There, you dis-
cover anew that they arise in great number and often
without any relatedness, appearing, for the most part,
randomly. You also realize that future thoughts have
not yet come. When you ask yourself which of these
thoughts is your mind, you realize that your false mind
rises and falls and is, thus, also devoid of reality. If
you continue in this way, you become familiar with
this unreality, and your false mind comes to an end by
itself; and with the false mind at an end, reality 1s
evident.

When you first sit down to practice, your mind is often
unsettled. This is appropriately called unsettled mind,
and to set it at rest, stopping, or Chih, is used. If it 1s

61
stopped again and again, the thinking process gradu-
ally comes to an end. While meditating, you may find
yourself getting drowsy. This is called sinking mind
and the way to awaken it is by contemplation, or Kuan,
which involves closing your eyes and looking inward,
as it were, to the source of your thoughts. There are
three kinds of Kuan, or contemplation: contemplation
of the void; contemplation of the unreal; and contem-
plation of the mean.

Contemplation of the Void

You look into all things within the universe, from the
largest-including the earth, mountains and rivers — to
the smallest — including your body and mind. Doing
SO, you perceive that everything changes in every
instant and is non-existent and void; and when your
mind looks into this voidness, that is called contempla-
tion of the void.

Contemplation of the Unreal

When you are familiar with this contemplation of the
void, you look into your mind or the place, as it were,
from which thoughts arise, and you find that each
thought has its object. You then realize that every

62
phenomenon owes its existence to a union of an inner
cause and an outer concurring circumstance. For
instance, a grain of rice sprouts because of the union of
an inner direct cause, which is the seed, with an outer
concurring condition, in the form of the water and mud
that moisten and nourish it. If the grain of rice is not
sown and 1s left in the warehouse, it will never sprout
because there is only an inner, direct cause without an
outer condition. Also, if there are only water and mud,
without the seed being sown, they, alone, cannot
produce the sprout because there has been no union
with an original cause-namely, the seed. Every phe-
nomenon in the world is created by the union of direct
and circumstantial causes and vanishes as soon as they
are separated. This includes thoughts that arise and
disappear in the mind and that cannot be grasped. Such
contemplation is called looking into the unreal.

Contemplation of the Mean

There are two contrasting attitudes connected with
contemplation of the void, on the one hand, and look-
ing into the unreal, on the other. When you reach this
stage, your achievement is still incomplete. Having
succeeded with contemplation of the void, do not cling
to the void; and when you have achieved contempla-

63
tion of the unreal, do not grasp at the unreal. When you
succeed in keeping from the extremes of the void and
the unreal, your non-relying and non-clinging mind
will be extraordinarily clear, and this stage is called,
contemplation of the mean.

At first glance, the Chih-Kuan Dharma Gate seems to
imply diverse or successive stages. In practice, the use
of either Chih or Kuan depends solely on the inclina-
tions of the mind during meditation. As a matter of
fact, the purpose of Chih is to return all thoughts to
one, the one mind, and that of Kuan is to attain clear
insight into the truth, which is to be free of illusion.
When stopping, or Chih, is practiced, it should not
stray from stopping. Do not cling to the printed word,
but practice intelligently, according to the circum-
stances.

The breath is the source of life. When the breath stops,
the body is just an inanimate corpse. With the nervous
system no longer functioning, the mind vanishes and
life comes to an end. That is why life is said to be
preserved by the breath, which links the body with the
mind. Thus, we see that a human being is composed of
body, breath and mind and that the breath plays the
important role of uniting the other two components.

64
The T’ien T’ai meditation manual, entitled The Six
Profound Dharma Gates (T’ung Meng Chih-Kuan),
focuses on breathing as a comprehensive practice that
may be preceded by training in the Chih-Kuan method,
or it can be used independently of it. The consecutive
stages are as follows:

1. Counting the breath

2. Following the breath
3. Stopping (Chih)

4. Contemplation (Kuan)
5. Returning

6. Purification

The Method of Counting the Breath

The breath-counting method offers two possibilities, as
follows: After you have regulated your breath, so that
it is neither too tight nor too loose, count slowly from
one to ten on either your inhalation or exhalation. Do
not count on both. For example, breathing in, count
one; then exhale and upon inhaling again, count two,
and so on. Your mind soon becomes fixed on the
activity and does not wander as readily. If it wanders
off before you have reached the count of ten, return

65
gently and without further thought to one, and resume
counting as described above. This is the method of
meditation known as Breath-Counting.

Realization Attained Through Breath-Counting

As you grow accustomed to the method just described,
your breath becomes finer and finer, until it seems to
be non-existent. This stage is called Realization By
Breath-Counting.

The Method of Following the Breath

This method is both easy and simple: Just focus on
your breath and follow it mindfully, holding on gently,
until it 1s no longer an issue. Then mind and breath
become one.

Realization Attained Through Following the Breath

As it follows the breath, your mind becomes increas-
ingly subtle. You may notice, at first, the length of
your breath; but as it gets more refined it becomes
almost undetectable, and at that point it feels as though
it is occurring through the pores of your skin. The
effect on your mind 1s stilling or calming. At this stage

66
of practice, you may wish to cultivate your breath
further. Your next step will be the practice of stopping,
also consisting of two phases: Chih and Kuan.

The Practice of Stopping, or Chih

Focus lightly on the tip of your nose; it leads to stopp-
ing. In the course of this simple practice, you may
suddenly feel as if your body and mind have vanished;
you will, thereby, enter a state of stillness called
dhyana.

Realization Attained Through the Practice of Chih

At this stage, clarity develops through awareness. You
feel no longer attached to anything, and there is no
longer a sense of subject and object while sitting; then
you proceed to the stage called Kuan.

The Practice of Contemplation, or Kuan

This practice consists of a gentle, passive observation
of your refined breathing, regarding it as a movement
in a void that has no reality of its own.

67
Realization Attained Through the Practice of Kuan

This is a further refinement of practice in which you
come to feel as though you are breathing through the
pores of your skin. To a bystander, you may appear as
if you are not breathing. When you reach this stage,
Chih and Kuan become indistinguishable. As a point
of interest, the Samatha Vipasyana for beginners
differs from Chih-Kuan in intent, in that the former
develops mindfulness, while the latter develops ab-
sorption. An extended session of contemplation should
be followed by Returning.

The Method of Returning

Contemplating your breath, you may realize that there
is an apparently subjective mind that contemplates an
apparently objective breath and that these very clearly
constitute the two poles, the essence, of duality. How-
ever, they are to be returned, as it were, to the one,

fundamental Mind.

Realization Attained Through the Method of Returning

This method develops the awareness of the knower that
contemplates the breath as rising and falling with the
mind. This rising and falling mind is experienced to be

68
like the waves that rise and fall in the sea, and this
leads to a realization of the illusory nature of it all. The
waves are not the water, the fundamental face of which
can be seen only after the waves have subsided. Simi-
larly, the mind that rises and falls, like the waves in the
water, is not the True Mind. Now look into this True
Mind, which is uncreated. Because it is uncreated, it is
beyond 1s and is not; and it is, therefore, void. Because
it is void, it follows that there is no subjective mind
that contemplates. Because there is no contemplating
mind, it follows that there is no object contemplated;
and because knowledge and its object vanish, this is
called The-Realization-of-Returning Method. Follow-
ing that realization, the idea of returning remains; to
relinquish it, one should meditate on purity.

Realization of the State of Purity

The practice of purification consists of contemplation
on discriminating views. When the mind is still like
calm water and there is an absence of false thinking,
the Real Mind, which does not exist apart from false
thinking, manifests. This water-without-waves sort of
Mind is called The Realization of Purity.

69
These Six Profound Dharma Gates may be seen as
consisting of a preliminary set of methods, involving
counting and following the breath, the two main prac-
tices of Chih and Kuan, and the concluding practices
of returning and purifying. More specifically, stopping
(Chih) is the chief practice, while contemplation
(Kuan) is its support, until perception is realized,
which means that one is no longer involved in making
distinctions or having attachments. This reference to
perception refers to the five skandhas, wherein it is
seen that distinctions are made at the level of concep-
tion. Thus, no longer being at that level is to be at the
more subtle level of perceptions (again relating to the

five skandhas).

To realize Great Dhyana and Great Prajna, the mind
must be at ease. The-Six-Profound-Dharma-Gates
process contains methods that are designed to regulate
the mind, enabling it to relax. This is paramount, for if
you do not know how to relax, you cannot even begin
to practice. Having learned to relax, then, and with
mind and breath regulated, meditation can take place.
It is then that you can practice The Six Profound
Dharma Gates of counting, following, stopping, con-
templating, returning and purifying, going through all
of them over and over again, slowly and patiently,

70
putting your mind ever more at ease as you let go more
and more. To follow any strict order of practice at this
time is counterproductive. If you find that counting the
breath goes well for you, count your breath. If the
purifying method seems called for and works well for
you, do that. Then, in only a few days, you may be
able to understand your mind easily as never before.

Meditation and Ch’an Ting

Suffice it to say that there are many approaches to
meditation in Buddhadharma that are to be found
under the headings of Ch’an and Ch’an Ting. Ch’an
Ting alone is an umbrella name for many methods: the
Four Dhyanas, the Four Infinities, the Four-Void
Worldly Ch’an, the Nine Observations, the Samadhi of
Nine Degrees (supramundane), the Ch’an of Self-
Nature and the Ch’an Ting. These approaches can lead
one to deep dhyana, where real wisdom is to be found;
and with real wisdom, there can be self- enlighten-
ment, enlightenment of others and the Ultimate Perfect
Enlightenment.

It has been suggested that to sit alone in a forest or on
some remote mountainside to meditate would seem to
abnegate the Bodhisattva vow of saving all sentient

71
beings. In answer to that, consider that even a Bodhi-
sattva who is far away from all sentient beings still
retains them in his mind. Therefore, it is in this way,
when you meditate in the quiet place of Ch’an Ting
and have acquired real Wisdom, that you can truly help
sentient beings. If you are still curious as to why you
must practice in solitude, consider this analogy. It is
somewhat like trying to light a lamp in a strong wind,
as opposed to taking it to a room where the air is still.
Just as it is so very difficult, if not impossible, to light
a lamp in a storm, it is equally hard to find wisdom in
a disordered mind. Thus, even Bodhisattvas live apart
from sentient beings and stay in quiet places, so that
they can practice Ch’an Ting and develop and purify
their wisdom.

You have to concentrate or focus your attention on
whatever you do in the everyday world, if you want to
do it properly. The same applies to the quiet inner
world, as well, although not in quite the same way. To
make another analogy, let us say that you have a lamp
that is in good working order and that all the surround-
ing conditions contribute to its producing a good,
bright light. It is only then that you will have a good,
bright light. However, the practice of Buddhadharma
assuredly is far more subtle than the act of lighting a

72
lamp. The mind of confusion is much lighter than even
the lightest feather and moves so swiftly that it is gone
before anything can be done about it. It cannot be
controlled, because any such attempt is, in itself, an act
of confusion. As quickly as lightning, the objects of
the mind appear and disappear, and this frenetic activ-
ity does not stop. Indeed, it cannot stop! The only way
out of this tangle is made possible through meditation.

In The Commentary on the Dhyana Paramita, it is
written that a Bodhisattva must abandon his family and
all his worldly possessions, be ready to give up his
very life, and then stay in a quiet place to prepare his
mind for dhyana by remaining still and calm in body
and mind. When he 1s free of thought, there 1s no way
for evil to arise. In preparing for dhyana, one must
endure whatever happens, never tiring, always perse-
vering. When confronted with evil (an obstacle to
samadhi), he must exercise great patience in not re-
sponding with the defilement of anger. This 1s accom-
plished by not discriminating and by neither grasping
at nor rejecting anything. In his quest for dhyana, he
concentrates on the one Mind (the one mind being no-
mind). Nothing sways him from his course. He sits,
never lying down, sits even though tired, never resting;
and, though seemingly gaining nothing by his apparent

73
efforts, he, thereby shows, indeed, his great progress.
A Bodhisattva practices and completes all of the Six
Paramitas, concentrates on the one Mind, which is no-
mind, and can finally understand all the aspects of
birth and death in the world through Prajna.

Counting the Breath

| previous | content | next |

All of the Six Wonderful and Profound Dharma Gates
can produce many kinds of dhyana. The first of these
is attained by the practice of counting the breath,
because, in this way, you will arrive at the Four Dhy-
anas of Form, the Four Immeasurable Minds and the
Four Formless Dhyanas. When you have attained the
last stage of Neither Thinking Nor Not Thinking is Not
Nirvana, you have only attained The Way of The Three
Vehicles, because this worldly Ch’an Ting is not yet
real, still having some defilement. Using The Wonder-
ful Dharma Gate of counting the breath and neither
discriminating nor grasping, you can attain all three
Vehicles at the level of Hinayana.

74
Following The Breath

By this second practice, you can produce the Sixteen
Special Dharmas:

1.
2.
3.

CP NNN Ss

When inhaling, knowing that you are inhaling;
When exhaling, knowing that you are exhaling;

Knowing when you are breathing a long or a
short breath;

Knowing the whole body as the breath;
Knowing the movement of the body;
Knowing the delight of the mind;
Knowing the happiness of the mind;
Knowing mind activity;

Knowing comfort of the mind;

10. Knowing concentration of the mind;

11. Knowing freedom of mind;

12. Knowing impermanence;

13.Knowing all things (dharmas) as dispersed;

14. Knowing desirelessness;

15. Knowing nothingness or the property of vanishing;

16.Knowing what it is to abandon and give up

everything.

75
Stopping

If you practice stopping, you can obtain five kinds of
dhyana, as follows:

I.

Earth-Wheel Samadhi (which is not yet to have
arrived at the tenth stage);

. Water-Wheel Samadhi (which enables you to

have good conditions for all kinds of dhyanas);

. Space-Wheel Samadhi (which consists of five

expedient ways of dhyana practice, whereby you
come to understand space as being without any
nature);

The Wheel-of-Golden-Sand Samadhi (which
frees you from misleading views, so that you no
longer grasp after nght wisdom);

. The Wheel-of-Diamond Samadhi (which is also

known as The Completely-Without-Obstacles
Tao, a practice that lets you sever your bondage
to the three realms of desire, form and formless-
ness forever).

Furthermore, by stopping, you can attain Birthless
Wisdom, whereby you can gain entrance to Nirvana.

76
Contemplation

Through contemplation, you can take part in the Nine
Thinkings, the Eight Lines of Thought, the Freedom
From Eight Forms, the Eight Stages of Mental
Concentration, the Ten Universals, the Samadhi of the
Nine Degrees, the Samadhi of the Powerful Lion’s
Roar, the Transcendental Samadhi, the Practice of
Ch’an, the Fourteen Transmutations of Mind, the
Triple Bright Samadhi, the Six Transcendental Powers,
and the Eight Liberations, all of which enable you to
acquire the Samadhi of No-Sensation and No-Thought.

Returning

The meditator, through Prajna, is freed of defilements
by returning to the void of the Original Source, which
is no source and in which there is nothing but void-
without form and with non-action-indicating an ab-
sence of self-nature. Without any self-nature, there is
no longer a subject or an object, and distinctions are no
longer made because there is no one to make them and
nothing to make them about.

In this way, the thirty-seven conditions leading to
Bodhi are satisfied, as well as those contained in the
Four Noble Truths, the Twelve Nidanas and in the

77
Right Contemplation of the Middle Way, whereby
Nirvana can be attained.

Purification

If a meditator knows, through Prajna, that all Dharmas
are originally pure, he can acquire the Dhyana of Self-
Nature because he has attained what is known as
Hinayana Nirvana, or Two-Vehicles Nirvana. If a
Bodhisattva can enter the stage of the Iron-Wheel
King, has completed the Ten Grades of Bodhisattva
Faith and continues to practice, he can produce the
following nine kinds of Great Dhyana:

Self-Nature Dhyana

All Kinds of Dhyana

Difficult Dhyana

All-Kinds-of-Doors Dhyana

Good-Person Dhyana

All-Active Dhyana

Rid-of-Defilement Dhyana
The-Joy-of-This-Life-and-The-Next-Life Dhyana
Pure-and-Clean Dhyana (Since a Bodhisattva

depends on this kind of Dhyana, he can attain
The Fruit-of-Great-Bodhi Nirvana)

CON NN PWN

78
In Sudden Enlightenment, the nature of mind is real-
ized as being originally pure. Dharmas are neither
grasped at nor rejected; there is neither being nor non-
being; there is neither birth nor death; there is neither
this nor that; and there is neither void nor existence,
Then, there is the knowing afforded by the awareness
of non-duality, where nothing is grasped, there being
neither someone to grasp nor anything to grasp at. If
Original Substance is known, there is freedom from
attachment to the objects of the sense organs. Once
there is no longer any illusion of the existence of a
permanent self, there are no longer any encumbrances.
There is no grasping at the void and no holding to
stillness; there 1s simply whatever is, without defining
or choosing. Short of this, there might still be a some-
what encumbered level of awareness where there is a
recognition of still being in the midst of causes and
conditions, without attachment; but it is to be under-
stood that even this recognition is a kind of grasping.

The Sastra of Entering The Tao of Sudden Enlight-
enment, by Ch’an Master Hui Hai of the T’ang Dy-
nasty, asks what method should be used to understand
Original Dharma. The reply is that one need only to
practice dhyana. Referring to The Sutra of the Ch’an
Door, one reads that if you seek the wisdom of the

79
Buddha, you need Ch’an-Ting; for without it, you will
have a great abundance of false thoughts and will be in
danger of destroying your good roots. To understand
this more clearly, Ch’an-Ting 1s defined as follows:
When there are no false thoughts, that is Ch’an; and to
see one’s Original Nature is Zing. Original Nature is
also known as Non-Birth, or Unborn Mind, where
there is no longer any one to be moved by the eight
winds of gain, loss, defamation, fame, praise, ridicule,
sorrow and joy. Thus, even if one is worldly but attains
Ting, he already approaches being a Buddha.

Elsewhere it 1s written that if you are free of attach-
ment and if you no longer think of things (dharmas)
during meditation nor discriminate between good and
evil, then past things are past. If you do not think of
them, the mind of the past vanishes. This is called no
past. Furthermore, the future has not yet arrived; and
when it is not necessary to wish to obtain it, the mind
of the future is no more. This is called no future.
Finally, the present 1s already present, and there is no
need to grasp at anything. When you are free of
thoughts, there is no longer any grasping. Without
grasping, the mind of the present vanishes. This is
called no present. Then your mind dwells on nothing,
and this is Original Mind and Original Nature. This

80
Mind that dwells on nothing is the Mind of the Bud-
dha, the Mind of liberation and the Mind of no-birth.
Ch’an Master Kuei-Feng said that 7rue Nature 1s
neither pure nor impure and that there is no difference
between the holy and the worldly.

Varieties of Ch’an

| previous | content |

Master Kuei-Feng, also, said that when shallow and
deep stages of Ch’an are referred to and that when a
person chooses to practice the deep ones because he
looks down on the shallow stages and then finds a way
to do so, what he engages in is called heterodox Ch’an.
Holding to cause and effect and practicing with like
and dislike are known as Worldly-People Ch/’an.
However, when only the illusion of the personal self
has been eliminated through Enlightenment but not
that of the self-nature of dharmas (things), this 1s called
Hinayana Ch’an. On the other hand, when the ego and
all dharmas are enlightened, this is called Mahayana
Ch’an. Here, the self-nature of one’s self and the self-
nature of everything else, or all dharmas, are known to
be unreal. If one’s own mind is suddenly enlightened,

81
it is in its original purity, free of defilement and not
outside the stream. This mind is the Buddha, and
practicing in this manner is called Supreme Ch’an.

The Sixth Patriarch, Hui-Neng, described sitting Ch’an
by stating that being without obstacles in the Dharma
and being beyond all ideas of good and evil, without a
single thought arising, is called sitting, whereas seeing
into the stillness of one’s Original Nature is called
Ch’an. Regarding Ch’an-Ting, he said that the absence
of external form (i.e., no object) is Ch’an, and to be
free of the confusion of thought (i.e., no subject) 1s
Ting. Furthermore, he said that if one grasps the forms
(the apparent objects outside), this is evidence of a
confused mind and adds to the confusion of what the
mind conceives of as being inside. If one is no longer
attached to objects and to there being an outside, then
there is no longer any such confusion of mind. Origi-
nal Nature is pure and still, but is disturbed by thinking
and, it follows, by objects. When there are no things,
no outside and no confusion in the mind, that is real
Ting. The Sutra of Bodhisattva Discipline is a bit
more succinct. There, it simply says that originally
your own nature is clean and pure.

82
Observing The Mind

We are ordinarily concerned with things that are
conceived of as being outside of us, or, essentially, the
objects of our thoughts; and we never think of observ-
ing the place within, as it were, whence thoughts seem
to arise. By looking inward at the source of thought,
the workings of your mind are still evident but are no
longer so commanding, and a more and more passive
sort of observation develops that reduces false thought
and can help to reveal your own True Nature. In all
Mahayana sutras, it can be seen that Prajna (Wisdom)
must be accompanied by Universal Illumination. In
one such sutra entitled Observing the Ground of the
Mind, it is stated that one who observes the mind can
be liberated but that one who does not is always bound
by birth and death. Along somewhat similar lines, one
finds in The Sutra of Nirvana that Supreme Dhyana
is described as observing the nature of the mind. Chih-
Kuan, in Buddhadharma, is translated as either Dhyana
and Wisdom (Ting-Hui) or Stillness and Illumination.
In The Maha-Chih-Kuan the stillness of Dharma
Nature is called Chih, and stillness with illumination is
called Kuan; and it concludes, therefore, that Chih-
Kuan is the supreme method for purifying the mind.
There are, however, many ways to practice Chih-

83
Kuan. Just to mention a few, there are Deep and Shal-
low, Sudden and Gradual, Cultivation and Principles
and Complete and Incomplete; and to complicate
matters even further, there are three different catego-
ries of Chih-Kuan in the T’ien T’ai tradition: gradual,
unfixed and perfect.

Gradual Chih-Kuan

In The Commentary on the Dhyana Paramita of
Gradual Chih-Kuan, practice is described as being
shallow at first and deep later, which implies a gradual
development. Understanding, however, is said to come
suddenly.

Unfixed Chih-Kuan

Unfixed Chih-Kuan, also known as The Six Wonderful
Dharma Gates, is sometimes described as the step-by-
step method leading to sudden understanding. Here,
practice is gradual at first and then sudden.

Perfect Chih-Kuan

In The Maha-Chih-Kuan, it says that in Perfect and
Sudden Chih-Kuan, all conditions and reality are
merely three contemplations in one mind, and that
there is only sudden understanding and action, with no

84
distinction as to when it began or as to how it pro-
gressed thereafter.

The practices of The Maha-Chih-Kuan method are
thorough, assuredly, but are too subtle to be done
without the aid of an accomplished teacher. However,
until such time as the reader may discover such a
teacher, he might practice the following effective
method of observing the mind. Sit comfortably in the
lotus position or in any other position that is suitable
for you. Lay down all things, and even give up the
thought of laying everything down. In this way, think-
ing of neither good nor evil, close your eyes gently and
lightly observe where your thoughts seem to issue
from. This permits you passively to be aware of your
false thoughts as they suddenly come and just as
suddenly go, neither grasping at them nor driving them
away; thus, in time, you can come to understand pro-
foundly that false thought has no self-nature (is empty)
and that it is originally void. When false thought is
then illuminated by your mind, a stillness becomes
evident, which then becomes suchness.Then if another
thought suddenly arises, using the same approach, just
observe lightly to see where the thought seems to come
from. Do this at least once a day for at least half an
hour.

85
If you continue to reinforce your knowledge of
Buddhadharma, as well, through reading and finding
people who are inclined to hear what you might have
to say about Buddhism or practice, then, over a period
of time, this meditation can help reduce false thought
(known as using wisdom to support Ting) and increase
the power of illumination (known as using Ting to
beget wisdom). If you continue in this way, you will,
eventually, be able to sit without a single thought
arising. When there is awareness, with no dwelling and
no grasping, the source of mind is void and still. Then,
Wisdom (Prajna) and Original Nature respond as one
from moment to moment. In The Hand-Flower Sutra,
it states that when you observe the mind, you see the
birth and death of thought after thought as having the
quality of being magical and unreal. The subject of
Wisdom is Prajna, which is like saying that Prajna is
Wisdom, while its object is ignorance (confusion or
false thought). The perfume of Prajna is then said to
permeate ignorance more and more until there is just
Prajna and a return to Original Nature. Whether walk-
ing, sitting or lying down, one should always be aware
of the Substance (stillness) of Original Nature.

The function of illumination is Enlightenment, which
is sometimes referred to as right thought about reality.

86
It is like a pearl that emits light and, thereby, also
illuminates the substance of the pearl. If a false thought
arises in an illuminated mind, it vanishes as quickly as
a snowflake in a blazing furnace. Then, even strong
habits no longer present any obstacles. With such
practice, your Original Nature appears stronger and
stronger. There should be no need or intention to have
illumination, because need and intention stand in the
way of its ever coming about. When there is real
illumination, there is no longer any involvement with
words. Then, mind is no-mind. Then, there is simply
Suchness. Without thought, there are no conditions;
and Original Nature, known directly, is reality. How-
ever, even if you can concentrate on one thought and
observe the mind for just a moment or two, you still
have benefited by knowing Prajna, and have, thereby,
planted the seed of Bodhi. In The Lankavatara
Sutra, it says that you should rely fully on the
teachings and then find a quiet place where, practicing
free of all doubt, there can be Enlightenment. In The
Sutra of Complete Enlightenment, it says that all
Tathagatas arise from the ground cause of correct prac-
tice; and so, again and again, proper understanding and
right practice are advised.

87
Conclusion

We have seen that there are many ways to bring about
meditation in the Buddhist tradition and that they can
bestow upon a practitioner all-around emotional,
mental and physical health, enabling him to gain
Enlightenment and, thereby, benefiting both himself
and others. There is the proviso, however, that even
though sitting practice can promote good health, health
is beneficial only temporarily; because, no matter how
long you live, you must finally die. In The Sutra of
Complete Enlightenment, it says that since time
without beginning, all sentient beings have been mired
in ignorance. In their confusion they have mistaken the
four elements (earth, water, fire, air) for their bodies
and the shadows of the data of their six conditioned
senses for their minds. The aim, then, is to be free of
those delusions, going from confusion to Enlighten-
ment. To keep that aim alive, it is important to use
sutras and anything else that helps to clarify Buddha-
dharma and to continue to practice discipline and
concentration in order to develop expert meditation so
that Prajna can arise.

| content |

88
Buddhism Glossary

A

Aj Bi C| Di E] Fl] G] HY | J] Ki L] M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Agadas

adj.: healthy; n.: antidote, panacea, universal remedy.

Agamas

Generic term applied to a collection of traditional
doctrines and precepts; also means the home or collect-
ing-place of the law or truth; the peerless law; the
ultimate absolute truth. The Four Agamas are as fol-
lows: (1) Dirghagama, “law treatises on cosmogony;
(2) Madhyamagama, “middle” treatises on metaphys-
ics; (3) Samyuktagama, “miscellaneous” treatises on
abstract contemplation; (4) Edottaragama, “numerical”
treatises on subjects treated numerically. The sutras of
Theravada are referred to at times as the Agamas.

89
Agara

House, dwelling, receptacle; also, used in the sense of
a Bodily organ, e.g., the ear for sound, etc.

Agaru/Aguru

Sandalwood incense.

Alaya Consciousness

The fundamental consciousness of all sentient beings.
As defined by the Yogacara School, Alaya means the
“storehouse”, implying that this consciousness con-
tains and preserves all past memories and potential
psychic energy within its fold; it is the reservoir of all
ideas, memories and desires and is also the fundamen-
tal cause of both Samsara and Nirvana.

Almsgiving

see charity.

Amitabha (Amida, Amita, Amitayus)

Amitabha is the most commonly used name for the
Buddha of Infinite Light and Infinite Life. A trans-
historical Buddha venerated by all Mahayana schools
(T’ien T’ai, Esoteric, Zen...) and, particularly, Pure
Land. Presides over the Western Pure Land (Land of

90
Ultimate Bliss), where anyone can be reborn through
utterly sincere recitation of His name, particularly at
the time of death.

Amitabha Buddha at the highest or noumenon level
represents the True Mind, the Self-Nature common to
the Buddhas and sentient beings — all-encompassing
and all-inclusive. This deeper understanding provides
the rationale for the harmonization of Zen and Pure

Land, two of the most popular schools of Mahayana
Buddhism. See also “Buddha Recitation,” “Mund,”
“Pure Land.”

Amitabha Sutra

See “Three Pure land Sutras.”

Anasrava

(Skt.) Opposite of asrava.

Anuttara-Samayak-Sambodhi

The incomparably, completely and fully awakened
mind; it is the attribute of buddhas.

91
Apaya-bhumi

States of woe: the three realms of existence character-
ized by extreme discomfort and delusion — 1.e., hell-
states, animal-birth and the hungry ghosts, or pretas.

Arhat

Arhatship 1s the highest rank attained by Sravakas. An
Arhat is a Buddhist saint who has attained liberation
from the cycle of Birth and Death, generally through
living a monastic life in accordance with the Buddhas’
teachings. This is the goal of Theravadin practice, as
contrasted with Bodhisattvahood in Mahayana prac-
tice. (A Dictionary of Buddhism.) The stage is pre-
ceded by three others: 1. Stream Winner, 2. Once-
Returner, 3. Non-Returner. See also “Sravakas.”

Arthakrtya

One of the Four All-Embracing Virtues: performance
of conduct profitable to others in order to lead them
toward the truth.

Arya

Any individual ennobled by his/her own continuing
effort on the path to enlightenment.

92
Asamkhiya (kalpa)

Term related to the Buddhist metaphysics of time.
Each of the periodic manifestations and dissolutions of
universes which go on eternally has four parts, called
asamkhiya kalpas.

Asrava

(Skt.) Pain causing impurity, defilement.

Asura

Titanic demons, enemies of the gods, with whom —
especially Indra — they wage war.

Attachment

In the Four Noble truths, Buddha Shakyamuni taught
that attachment to self is the root cause of suffering:

From craving [attachment] springs grief, from craving
springs fear; For him who is wholly free from craving,

there is no grief, much less fear. (Dhammapada Sutra.
In Narada Maha Thera, The Buddha and His Teach-

ings.)

If you don’t have attachments, naturally you’re liber-
ated... In ancient times, there was an old cultivator
who asked for instructions from a monk, “Great Monk,

93
let me ask you, how can I attain liberation?” The Great
monk said, “Who tied you up?” This old cultivator
answered, “Nobody tied me up.” The monk said,
“Then why do you seek liberation?” (Hsuan Hua, tr.,
Flower Adornment Sutra, “Pure Conduct,” chap. 11.)

For the seasoned practitioner, even the Dharma must
not become an attachment. As an analogy, to clean
one’s shirt, it is necessary to use soap. However, if the
soap is not then rinsed out, the garment will not be
truly clean. Similarly, the practitioner’s mind will not
be fully liberated until he severs attachment to every-
thing, including the Dharma itself.

Avalokitesvara

The name is a compound of Ishwara, meaning Lord,
and avalokita, looked upon or seen, and is usually
translated as the Lord Who Observes (the cries of the
world); the Buddhist embodiment of compassion as
formulated in the Mahayana Dharma. Also called
Kuan Yin, the Bodhisattva of Compassion. Guan Yin
is one of the triad of Amitabha Buddha, represented on
his left, Usually recognizable by the small Buddha
adorning Her crown. Guan Yin can transform into
many different forms in order to cross over to the

94
beings. Guan Yin is one of the most popular Bodhi-
sattva in China.

Avatamsaka (Flower Ornament) Sutra

The basic text of the Avatamsaka School. It is one of
the longest sutras in the Buddhist Canon and records
the highest teaching of Buddha Shakyamuni, immedi-
ately after Enlightenment. It is traditionally believed
that the Sutra was taught to the Bodhisattvas and other
high spiritual beings while the Buddha was in samadhi.
The Sutra has been described as the “epitome of Bud-
dhist thought, Buddhist sentiment and Buddhist ex-
perience” and is quoted by all schools of Mahayana
Buddhism, in particular, Pure Land and Zen.

Awakening vs. Enlightenment

A clear distinction should be made between awakening
to the Way (Great Awakening) and attaining the Way
(attaining Enlightenment). (Note: There are many
degrees of Awakening and Enlightenment. Attaining
the Enlightenment of the Arhats, Pratyeka Buddhas,
Bodhisattvas, etc. is different from attaining Supreme
Enlightenment, 1.e., Buddhahood. )

To experience a Great Awakening is to achieve
(through Zen meditation, Buddha Recitation, etc.) a

95
complete and deep realization of what it means to be a
Buddha and how to reach Buddhahood. It is to see
one’s Nature, comprehend the True Nature of things,
the Truth. However, only after becoming a Buddha can
one be said to have truly attained Supreme Enlighten-
ment (attained the Way). A metaphor appearing in the
sutras is that of a glass of water containing sediments.
As long as the glass is undisturbed, the sediments
remain at the bottom and the water is clear. However,
as soon as the glass is shaken, the water becomes
turbid. Likewise, when a practitioner experiences a
Great Awakening (awakens to the Way), his afflictions
(greed, anger and delusion) are temporarily suppressed
but not yet eliminated. To achieve Supreme Enlight-
enment (i.e., to be rid of all afflictions, to discard all
sediments) is the ultimate goal. Only then can he
completely trust his mind and actions. Before then, he
should adhere to the precepts, keep a close watch on
his mind and thoughts, like a cat stalking a mouse,
ready to pounce on evil thoughts as soon as they arise.
To do otherwise is to court certain failure, as stories
upon stories of errant monks, roshis and gurus demon-
Strate.

96
Awakening of the Faith (Treatise)

A major commentary by the Patriarch Asvaghosha
(Ist/2nd cent.), which presents the fundamental princi-
ples of Mahayana Buddhism. Several translations exist
in English.

B

A| BI] Cc] Di E| Fi Gl HY | J] Ki LY] M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Ban T’o

Suddhidanthaka in Sanskrit. Ban T’o was a disciple of
Buddha, and he was very forgetful; for when the
Buddha taught him the second sentence of a gatha of a
sutra he would forget the first one, and when he was
taught the third one he would forget the second one.

Ultimately, however, with persistence he became an
Arhat.

Bardo
The intermediate existence between death and reincar-
nation — a stage varying from seven to forty-nine

97
days, after which the Karmic body from previous lives
will certainly be reborn.

Bhiksu

Religious mendicant; Buddhist fully ordained monk.
Bhiksuni is the equivalent term designating a woman.

Bhadanta
“Most virtuous’; honorific title apllied to a Buddha.

Bhaisajyaguru

Sanskrit word, the Buddha of Medicine, who quells all
diseases and lengthens life. His is the Buddha in the
Pure Land of the Paradise of the East.

Bhutatathata

The true character of reality. The real as thus, always
or eternally so. True Suchness.

Bodhi

Sanskrit for Enlightenment. Also Perfect knowledge or
wisdom by which a person becomes a Buddha.

98
Bodhi-Tao

Bodhi-path: The way or path to the Supreme Enlight-
enment of Buddhahood.

Bodhi Mind (Bodhicitta, Great Mind)

The spirit of Enlightenment, the aspiration to achieve
it, the Mind set on Enlightenment. It involves two
parallel aspects: 1) the determination to achieve
Buddhahood and 11) the aspiration to rescue all sentient
beings.

Bodhimandala

Truth-plot, holy sits, place of Enlightenment, the place
where the Buddha attained Enlightenment.

Bodhisattvas

Those who aspire to Supreme Enlightenment and
Buddhahood for themselves and all beings. The word
Bodhisattva can therefore stand for a realized being
such as Avalokitesvara or Samantabhadra but also for
anyone who has developed the Bodhi Mind, the aspira-
tion to save oneself and others.

99
Bodhisattva-Tao

The way of the practitioner of Mahayana Buddhism.
One following this path aspires to the attainment of
Enlightenment for the sake and benefit of all sentient
beings.

Brahma Net Sutra (Brahmajala Sutra)

This is a sutra of major significance in Mahayana
Buddhism. In addition to containing the ten major
precepts of Mahayana (not to kill, steal, lie, etc.) the
Sutra also contains forty-eight less important injunc-
tions. These fifty-eight major and minor precepts
constitute the Bodhisattva Precepts, taken by most
Mahayana monks and nuns and certain advanced lay
practitioners.

Brahmacarya

Lit., Brahma or purified life, usually connoting the
practice of celibacy.

Brahmajala

Or Indra’s net, characterized by holding a luminous
gem in every one of its eyes. (Hindu mythology).

100
Brahmin

The highest of the four Castes in Hinduism. They
served Brahma, his offering, the keepers of the Vedas,
1.e. priestly.

Buddha

Lit., the Awakened One; one who through aeons of
spiritual development has attained Anuttara-Samyak-
Sambodhi. This epithet usually refers to Sakyamuni
Buddha, who lived and taught in India some 2,600
years ago.

Buddha Nature

The following terms refer to the same thing: Self-
Nature, True Nature, Original Nature, Dharma Nature,
True Mark, True Mind, True Emptiness, True Thus-
ness, Dharma Body, Original Face, Emptiness, Prajna,
Nirvana, etc.

According to the Mahayana view, [buddha-nature] is
the true, immutable, and eternal nature of all beings.
Since all beings possess buddha-nature, it 1s possible
for them to attain enlightenment and become a buddha,
regardless of what level of existence they occupy...
The answer to the question whether buddha- nature is
immanent in beings is an essential determining factor

101
for the association of a given school with Theravada or
Mahayana, the two great currents within Buddhism. In
Theravada this notion is unknown; here the potential to
become a buddha is not ascribed to every being. By
contrast the Mahayana sees the attainment of buddha-
hood as the highest goal; it can be attained through the
inherent buddha-nature of every being through appro-
priate spiritual practice. (The Shambhala Dictionary of
Buddhism and Zen. )

See also “Dharma Nature.”

Buddha Recitation

See “Buddha-Remembrance”’.

Buddha-Remembrance

General term for a number of practices, such as
1) oral recitation of Amitabha Buddha’s name and
11) visualization/contemplation of His auspicious marks
and those of the Pure Land.

In reciting the buddha-name you use your own mind to
be mindful of your own true self: how could this be
considered seeking outside yourself?

Reciting the buddha-name proceeds from the mind.
The mind remembers Buddha and does not forget.

102
That’s why it is called buddha remembrance, or recit-
ing the buddha-name mindfully.

The most common Pure Land technique 1s recitation of
Amitabha Buddha’s name. See also “Amitabha,” “Pure
Land.”

Buddhadharma

Lit., Teaching of Enlightenment. Originally apllied to
designate the teaching of Shakyamuni Buddha; sup-
planted by the term “Buddhism” in its later historical
development.

Buddharupa

A statue or Image of the Buddha, used for devotional
purposes.

Bhutatathata

The Real as thus, always or eternally so; 1.e., Reality as
contrasted with unreality.

103
C

A| Bi C| D] E] F] G| HY bl J] KIL] M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Caitya

Tumulus, a mausoleum; a place where the relics of
Buddha were collected; hence, a place where the sutras
or images are placed.

Cakravala

The nine cakravala or concentric mountain ranges or
continents, separated by eight seas, of a universe.

Candana

White candana, or white sandalwood.

Chan

See Zen.

Ch’an-Ting

Lit., mind still and quiet: the Chinese translation of the
Sanskrit terms Dhyana-Samadhi, meaning deep con-
templative practice or yogic absorption.

104
Charity

or almsgiving, the first Paramitas. There are three
kinds of charity in terms of goods, teaching (Dharma)
and courage (fearlessness). Out of the three, the merits
and virtues of the teaching of the Buddha Dharma is
the most surpassing. Charity done for no reward here
and hereafter is called pure or unsullied, while the
sullied charity is done for the purpose of personal
benefits. In Buddhism, the merits and virtues of pure
charity is the best.

Chiliocosm

Countless Universes.

Chih-Kuan

In practice there are three contemplations; seeing such
abstractions: (1) by fixing the mind on the nose, navel,
etc. (2) by stopping every thought as it arises; (3) by
dwelling on the thought that no thing exists of itself,
but from a preceding cause.

Chung Yin Shen
See Bardo.

105
Cintamani

The talismanic pearl, a symbol of bestowing fortune
and capable of fulfilling every wish.

Citta
Mind or heart. the two terms being synonymous in
Asian religious philosophy.

Conditioned (compounded)

Describes all the various phenomena in the world -
made up of separate, discrete elements, “with out-
flows,” with no intrinsic nature of their own. Condi-
tioned merits and virtues lead to rebirth within sam-
sara, whereas unconditioned merits and virtues are the
causes of liberation from Birth and Death. See also
“Unconditioned.”

106
D

A| Bi C| DE] F]| G| H] bl J] KIL] M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Dana

The practice of generosity or charity: one of the Pa-
ramitas as well as one of the All-Embracing Virtues,
where it means, in the latter, giving others what they
want just to lead them towards the truth.

Dedication of Merit

See “Transference of Merit.”

Delusion (Ignorance)

“Delusion refers to belief in something that contradicts
reality. In Buddhism, delusion is... a lack of awareness
of the true nature or Buddha nature of things, or of the
true meaning of existence. “According to the Buddhist
outlook, we are deluded by our senses — among which
intellect (discriminating, discursive thought) is in-
cluded as a sixth sense. Consciousness, attached to the
senses, leads us into error by causing us to take the
world of appearances for the world of reality, whereas

107
in fact it is only a limited and fleeting aspect of reality.”
(The Shambhala Dictionary of Buddhism and Zen. )

Demons

Evil influences which hinder cultivation. These can
take an infinite number of forms, including evil beings
or hallucinations. Disease and death, as well as the
three poisons of greed, anger and delusion are also
equated to demons, as they disturb the mind.

The Nirvana Sutra lists four types of demon: 1) greed,
anger and delusion; 11) the five skandas, or obstructions
caused by physical and mental functions; 111) death;
iv) the demon of the Sixth Heaven (Realm of Desire).

The Self-Nature has been described in Mahayana
sutras as a house full of gold and jewelry. To preserve
the riches, 1.e., to keep the mind calm, empty and still,
we should shut the doors to the three thieves of greed,
anger and delusion. Letting the mind wander opens the
house to “demons,” that is, hallucinations and harm.
Thus, Zen practitioners are taught that, while in medi-
tation, “Encountering demons, kill the demons, en-
countering Buddhas, kill the Buddhas.” Both demons
and Buddhas are mind-made, Mind-Only.

108
For a detailed discussion of demons, see Master Thich
Thien Tam, Buddhism of Wisdom and Faith, sect. 51.

Devakanya

Goddess in general attendance on the regents of the
sun and moon.

Deva

Lit., “A shining one”. An inhabitant of the heavenly
realms, which is characterized by long life, joyous
surroundings and blissful states of mind. In the Bud-
dhist tradition, these states are understood to be 1m-
permanent, not eternal.

Deva King

The four Deva Kings in the first, or lowest, Devaloka
on its four sides are the following: East-Dhrtarastra;
South-Virodhaka; West-Viropaksa; North-Dhanada, or
Vaisravana.

Dharani

Extended mantra used in esoteric branch of Buddhism
to focus and expand the mind. Its words, or sounds,
should not communicate any recognizable meaning.

109
Dharma

a) The teachings of the Buddhas (generally capitalized
in English); b) duty, law, doctrine; c) things, events,
phenomena, everything.

Dharma-dhatu

The Law-doctrine that is the reality behind being and
non-being. It 1s interpenetrative and all-inclusive, just
as the rotation of the earth holds both night and day.

Dharma Door

The doctrines or wisdom of Buddha regarded as the
doorway to Enlightenment; a method. Just as the living
have 84,000 delusions, so the Buddha provides 84,000
methods (Dharma-Doors) to deal with them.

Dharma-Ending Age, Degenerate Age, Last Age.

The present spiritually degenerate era, twenty-six
centuries after the demise of Shakyamuni Buddha. The
concept of decline, dissension and schism within the
Dharma after the passing of the Buddha is a general
teaching of Buddhism and a corollary to the Truth of
Impermanence. See, for example, the Diamond Sutra
(sect. 6 in the translation by A.F. Price and Wong
Mou-lam). The time following Buddha Shakyamuni’s

110
demise is divided into three periods: 1) the Perfect Age
of the Dharma, lasting 500 years, when the Buddha’s
teaching (usually meditation) was correctly practiced
and Enlightenment often attained; 11) the Dharma
Semblance Age, lasting about 1,000 years, when a
form of the teaching was practiced but Enlightenment
seldom attained; i111) the Dharma-Ending Age, lasting
some ten thousand years, when a diluted form of the
teaching exists and Enlightenment is rarely attained.

Dharma Gate

See “Dharma Door.”

Dharma Nature

The intrinsic nature of all things. Used interchangeably
with “emptiness,” “reality.” See also “Buddha Nature.”

Dharmakara

The Bodhisattva who later became Amitabha Buddha,
as related in the Longer Amitabha Sutra. The Bodhi-
sattva Dharmakara is famous for forty-eight Vows,
particularly the eighteenth, which promises rebirth in
the Pure Land to anyone who recites His name with
utmost sincerity and faith at the time of death.

111
Dharmakaya
See “Three bodies of the Buddha.”

Dasabhumi

The “Ten Stages” in the fifty-two sections of the
development of a Bodhisattva into a Buddha.

Dhyana

The practice of concentration — 1.e., meditation. Also,
more specifically, the four form concentrations and the
four formless concentrations.

Diamond Sutra

“An independent part of the Prajnaparamita Sutra,
which attained great importance, particularly in East
Asia. It shows that all phenomenal appearances are not
ultimate reality but rather illusions, projections of
one’s own mind... The work 1s called Diamond Sutra
because it is ‘sharp like a diamond that cuts away all
unnecessary conceptualizations and brings one to the
further shore of enlightenment.’ (The Shambhala
Dictionary of Buddhism and Zen.)

112
Difficult Path of Practice (Path of the Sages,
Self-Power Path)

According to Pure Land teaching, all conventional
Buddhist ways of practice and cultivation (Zen, Thera-
vada, the Vinaya School...), which emphasize self-
power and self-reliance. This is contrasted to the Easy
Path of Practice, that is, the Pure Land method, which
relies on both self-power and other-power (the power
and assistance of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas).

Duskrta

Wrongdoing, evil action, misdeed, sin; external sins of
the body and the mouth; a light sin.

Dusts (Worldly Dusts)

A metaphor for all the mundane things that can cloud
our bright Self-Nature. These include form, sound,
scent, taste, touch, dharmas (external opinions and
views). These dusts correspond to the five senses and

the discriminating, everyday mind (the sixth sense, in
Buddhism).

Dviyana

Lit., two vehicles. The two vehicles or practice paths
of Sravakayana and Pratyekabuddhayana.

113
Dwo-Shih

An unusual term indicating one who has practiced the
Tao with great diligence and blessing during his life-
time and who, after his death, does not want to enter
just any womb, but prefers to wait for some auspicious
condition, usurping such a good position from another,
less highly developed spirit.

E

A| Bi Cc] Dj Ef Fi Gl Hy | J] KI Ll M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Easy Path of Practice

Refers to Pure Land practice. The Easy Path involves
reliance on the power of the Buddhas and Bodhisatt-
vas, in particular Buddha Amitabha (“other-power’’) in
addition to one’s own cultivation (“‘self-power’).
Usually contrasted with primary reliance on self-power
(Difficult Path of Practice), taught in other Buddhist
schools. Equal reliance on self-power and other-power
distinguishes the Pure Land School from most other

114
schools of Buddhism. The distinction is, however, a
matter of emphasis, as all schools of Buddhism rely, to
a greater or lesser extent, on both self-power and other-
power. See also “Other-power”’.

Eight Divisions of Gods and Dragons

Devas (gods), Nagas (Dragons) and others of eight
divisions (classes): deva, nagas, yakas, ganharvas,
asuras, gaudas, kinaras, mahoragas.

Eight Sufferings

(1) Suffering of Birth; (2) Suffering of Old Age;
(3) Suffering of Sickness; (4) Suffering of Death;
(5) Suffering of being apart from the loved ones;
(6) Suffering being together with the despised ones;
(7) Suffering of not getting what one wants; (8) Suffer-
ing of the flouishing of the Five Skandhas.

Eight Winds

Winds of Eight Directions. Most people are usually
moved by the winds of the eight directions: (1) Praise;
(2) Ridicule; (3) Suffering; (4)Happiness; (5) Benefit;
(6) Destruction; (7) Gain; (8) Loss.

115
Eightfold Path

The eight right ways leading to the cessation of suffer-
ings. (1) Right View; (2) Right Thought; (3) Right
Speech; (4) Right Action; (5) Right Livelihood;
(6) Right Effort; (7) Right Remembrance; (8) Right
Concentration.

Endurance (World)
See “Saha World.”

Enlightenment

See “Awakening vs. Enlightenment.”

Evil Paths

The paths of hells, hungry ghosts, animality. These
paths can be taken as states of mind; 1.e., when some-
one has a vicious thought of maiming or killing an-
other, he is effectively reborn, for that moment, in the

hells.

Expedient means (Skillful means, Skill-in-means,
Upaya)
Refers to strategies, methods, devices, targetted to the

capacities, circumstances, likes and dislikes of each
sentient being, so as to rescue him and lead him to

116
Enlightenment. “Thus, all particular formulations of
the Teaching are just provisional expedients to com-
municate the Truth (Dharma) in specific contexts.”
(J.C. Cleary.) “The Buddha’s words were medicines
for a given sickness at a given time,” always infinitely
adaptable to the conditions of the audience.

Externalists

Literally, followers of non-Buddhist paths. This term 1s
generally used by Buddhists with reference to follow-
ers of other religions.

F

A| Bi C| Di] E] FL S| Hy tl J] Ki LY M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Five Bhikshus

The first five of Buddha’s converts: Ajnata-
Kaundinya, Asvajit, Bhadrika, Dasabala-Kasyapa, and
Mahanama-Kulika. They were the first five disciples
that Shakyamuni preached when he became Buddha.

117
Five Corruptions

See “Five Turbidities.”

Five Desires (Five Sensual Pleasures)

Desires connected with the five senses, 1.e., form,
sound, aroma, taste and touch.

Five Eyes

1. human eye; 2. devine eye; 3. dharma eye; 4. wisdom
eye; 5. Buddha eye.

Five Fundamental Conditions of Passions and
Delusions

1. Wrong views which are common to _ triloka;
2. Clinging or attachment in the desire realm; 3. Cling-
ing or attachment in the form realm: 4. Clinging or
attachment in the formless realm which is still mortal;
5. The state of unenlightenment which is the root-
cause of all distressful delusion.

Five Natures

The natures of (1) Bodhisattvas, (2) Sravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas, (3) ordinary good people, (4) agnos-
tics, (5) heretics.

118
Five Offenses

The five rebellious acts or deadly sins: (1) parricide;
(2) matricide; (3) killing an arhat; (4) shedding the
blood of a Buddha; (5) destroying the harmony of the
sangha, or fraternity.

Five Precepts

The precepts taken by lay Buddhists, prohibiting
1) killing, 11) stealing 111) lying, iv) sexual misconduct,
v) ingesting intoxicants. See also “Ten Precepts.”

Five Skandhas

The five groups of elements (Dharmas) into which all
existences are classified in early Buddhism. The five
are: Rupa (matter), Vedana (feeling), Sanjna (idea-
tion); Samskara (forces or drives) Vijnana (conscious-
ness or sensation). Group, heap, aggregate; the five
constituents of the personality; form, feeling, percep-
tion, impulses, consciousness; the five factors consti-
tuting the individual person.

Five Turbidities (Corruptions, Defilements, De-
pravities, Filths, Impurities)

They are. 1. the defilement of views, when incorrect,
perverse thoughts and ideas are predominant; 2. the

119
defilement of passions, when all kinds of transgres-
sions are exalted; 3. the defilement of the human
condition, when people are usually dissatisfied and
unhappy; 4. the defilement of the life-span, when the
human life-span as a whole decreases; S. the defile-
ment of the world-age, when war and natural disasters
are rife. These conditions, viewed from a Buddhist
angle, however, can constitute aids to Enlightenment, as
they may spur practitioners to more earnest cultivation.

Flower Store World

The entire cosmos, consisting of worlds upon worlds
ad infinitum, as described in the Avatamsaka Sutra. It
is the realm of Vairocana Buddha, the transcendental
aspect of Buddha Shakyamuni and of all Buddhas. The
Saha World, the Western Pure Land and, for that
matter, all lands and realms are within the Flower
Store World.

Four Aspects (of Buddha Dharma)

(1) the teaching; (2) the principle; (3) the practice;
(4) the fruit/reward/result.

120
Four Elements

All matters are formed and are composed by four
conditioned causes : (1) earth, which is characterized
by solidity and durability; (2) water, which is charac-
terized by liquid/fluid and moisture; (3) fire, which is
characterized by energy and warmth; (4) wind, which
is characterized by gas/air movement.

Four Fruits of the Arhat
See under Arhat entry.

Four Great Bodhisattva

They represent the four major characters of Bodhi-
Sattva:

1. Manjusri - Universal Great Wisdom Bodhisattva;

2. Samantabhadra - Universal Worthy Great Conduct
Bodhisattva;

3. Ksitigarbha - Earth Store King Great Vow Bodhi-
sattva;

4. Avalokitesvara - Guan Shr Yin Great Compassion
Bodhisattva.

121
Four Great Vows (Four Universal Vows)

The four vows held by all Bodhisattvas. These vows
are called great because of the wondrous and incon-
ceivable compassion involved in fulfilling them. They
are as follows: Sentient beings without number we vow
to enlighten; Vexations without end we vow to eradi-
cate; Limitless approaches to Dharma we vow to
master; The Supreme Awakening we vow to achieve.

Four Noble Truths

1) Sufferings; 2) Cause of Sufferings; 3) Cessation of
sufferings; 4) The Path leading to the cessation of
sufferings.

Four Pure Lands

A classification by the Pure Land and T’ien T’ai
schools of the pure realms subsumed under the Land of
Amitabha Buddha, as described in the sutras. They are:

1) the Land of Common Residence of Beings and
Saints (Land Where Saints and Ordinary Beings Dwell
Together), where all beings, from the six lower worlds
(hells, hungry ghosts...) to the Buddhas and Bodhi-
sattvas, live together (further divided into two, the
Common Residence Pure Land and Common Resi-
dence Impure Land);

122
11) the Land of Expediency (Land of Expedient Libera-
tion), inhabited by Arhats and lesser Bodhisattvas;

111) the Land of Real Reward, inhabited by the highest
Bodhisattvas;

iv) the Land of Eternally Quiescent Light, in which the
Buddhas dwell.

These distinctions are at the phenomenal level. At the
noumenon level, there is, of course, no difference
among them.

Four Reliance (to learning Buddhist Dharma)

The four standards of Right Dharma which buddhist
should rely on or abide by:

(1) to abide by the Dharma, not the person;

(2) to abide by the sutras of ultimate truth, not the
sutras of incomplete truth;

(3) to abide by the meaning, not the word;
(4) to abide by the wisdom, not the consciousness.

Four Unlimited Mind

The mind of Bodhisattva: 1. Kindness; 2. Compassion;
3. Delight; 4. Renunciation.

123
Four Virtues

The four Nirvanic virtues: (1) Eternity or permanence;
(2) Joy; (3) Personality; (4) Purity. These four impor-
tant virtues are affirmed by the sutra in the transcen-
dental or nirvana-realm.

Four Ways (of learning Buddhist Dharma)

(1) Belief/faith; (2)  Interpretation/discernment;
(3) Practice/performance; (4) Verification/assurance.
These are the cyclic process in learning a truth.

Four Wisdom

The forms of wisdom of a Buddha. (1) the Great-
Mirror wisdom of Aksobhya; (2) the Universal Wis-
dom of Ratnaketu; (3) the Profound Observing Wis-
dom of Amitabha; (4) the Perfecting Wisdom of
Amoghsiddhi.

Fourfold Assembly

Or the Four Varga (groups) are bhiksu, bhiksuni,
upasaka and upasika, i.e. monks, nuns, male and
female devotees.

124
G

A| Bi C| Di El F| G{ Hy I J] KIL] M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Good Spiritual Advisor

Guru, virtuous friend, wise person, Bodhisattva, Bud-
dha — anyone (even an evil being!) who can help the
practitioner progress along the path to Enlightenment.
This notwithstanding, wisdom should be the primary
factor in the selection of such an advisor: the advisor
must have wisdom, and both advisor and practitioner
must exercise wisdom in selecting one another.

Great Awakening

See “Awakening vs. Enlightenment.”

Great Vehicle
See Mahayana.

125
H

A] Bi C| Di E] F] G| HY tl J] KIL] M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Hua T’ou

Lit., ante word. The reality prior to the arising of
thought.

Heaven of the Thirty-Three

A heaven in the Realm of Desire, with thirty-two god-
kings presided over by Indra, thus totaling thirty-
three, located at the summit of Mt. Sumeru (G.C.C.
Chang).

Heretical views

The sutras usually refer to sixty-two such views. They
are the externalist (non-Buddhist) views prevalent in
Buddha Shakyamuni’s time.

Hinayana

The Lesser Vehicle; a term applied by the Mahayana
to those schools of Buddhism that practice to attain the
fruits of Sravakayana and Pratyekabuddhayana and do

126
not attempt to attain the Anuttara-Samyak-Sambodhi
of Buddha.

Holy One

Holy or Saintly One; One who has started on the path
to Nirvana.

A| Bi C| Di El F] G| HY] tf J] Ki LY M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Icchantika

One who has no interest in the path to Awakening, or
one whose good roots are completely covered.

127
J

A| Bi C| Di El F] S| HY I J] Ki LY M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Jambunada-suvarna

Jambu River gold; the golden sand of the Jambu river.

Jetavana

A park near the city of Sravasti, said to have been
obtained from Prince Jeta by Anathapindika, in which
monasterial buildings were erected; the favorite resort
of Sakyamuni.

Jewel Net of Indra

This is a net said to hang in the palace of Indra, the
king of the gods. At each interstice of the net is a
reflecting jewel, which mirrors not only the adjacent
jewels but the multiple images reflected in them. This
famous image is meant to describe the unimpeded
interpenetration of all and everything.

128
K

A] Bi C| Di E] F] G| H] I J] Ki LY M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Kalpa

Periodic manifestations and dissolutions of universes
which go on etemally. Great kalpas consist of four
asamkhiya kalpas corresponding to childhood. matur-
ity, old age and the death of the universe.

Karma

Volition, volitional or intentional activity. Karma is
always followed by its fruit, Vipaka. Karma and V1-
paka are oftentimes referred to as the law of causality,
a cardinal concern in the Teaching of the Buddha.

Common karma: the difference between personal and
common karma can be seen in the following example:
Suppose a country goes to war to gain certain eco-
nomic advantages and in the process, numerous sol-
diers and civilians are killed or maimed. If a particular

129
citizen volunteers for military service and actually
participates in the carnage, he commits a personal
karma of killing. Other citizens, however, even if
opposed to the war, may benefit directly or indirectly
(e.g., through economic gain). They are thus said to
share in the common karma of killing of their country.

Fixed karma: in principle, all karma is subject to
change. Fixed karma, however, is karma which can
only be changed in extraordinary circumstances,
because it derives from an evil act committed
simultaneously with mind, speech and body. An exa
mple of fixed karma would be a premeditated crime
(versus a crime of passion).

Kaliraja

A king of Magadha noted for his violence; it 1s said
that in a former incarnation he cut off the ears, nose
and hands of the Buddha, who bore it all unmoved.

Kasaya

The monk’s robe, or cassock.

Klesa

Passion, desire, impulse, instinctive desires, including
1) craving; 2) hatred; and 3) ignorance. Defiling

130
forces, passions, instinctive cravings, drives, defile-
ments, desires; that which binds one in samsara.

Ksana

An inconceivably short mind-moment.

Ksanti

Patience or forbearance, one of the Six Paramitas.

Ksantyrsi

The Rsi who patiently suffered insult; i.e., Sakyamuni,
in a former life, suffering mutilation in order to convert
Kaliraja.

Ksatriya

The second of the four Hindi Castes at the time of
Shakyamuni, they were the royal caste, the noble
landlord, the warriors and the ruling castes.

131
L

A| Bi C| Di El F] G| HY tl J] KI LT M|
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Laksana

A distinctive mark, sign, indication, characteristic or
designation. A Buddha is recognized by his thirty-two
characteristic physiological marks.

Lankavatara Sutra

The only sutra recommended by Bodhidharma, the
First Zen Patriarch in China. It is a key Zen text, along
with the Diamond Sutra (recommended by the Sixth
Patriarch), the Surangama Sutra, the Vimalakirti Sutra,
the Avatamsaka Sutra... The last four sutras are re-
ferred to frequently in Pure Land commentaries.

Last Age
See “Dharma-Ending Age.”

Law of Interdependent Causation

It states that all phenomena arise depending upon a
number of casual factors. In other word, a phenomenon

132
exists in condition that the other exist; it has in condi-
tion that others have; it extinguishes in condition that
others extinguish; it has not in condition that others
have not. For existence, there are twelve links in the
chain:

¢ Ignorance 1s the condition for karmic activity;
¢ Karmic activity is the condition for consciousness;

¢ Consciousness is the condition for the name and
form;

e Name and form is the condition for the six sense
organs;

¢ Six sense organs are the condition for contact;

¢ Contact is the condition for feeling;

¢ Feeling is the condition for emotional love/craving;

¢ Emotional love/craving is the condition for grasping;
¢ Grasping is the condition for existing;

¢ Existing is the condition for birth;

¢ Birth is the condition for old age and death;

¢ Old age and death is the condition for ignorance; and
SO on.

133
Lesser Vehicle

The early Buddhism. A term coined by Mahayanists to
distinguish this school of Buddhism [whose modern
descendent is Theravada] from Mahayana. It is so
called because the teaching of this school puts empha-
sis on one’s own liberation, whereas the teaching of
Mahayana stresses the attainment of Buddhahood for
all sentient beings. Theravada is now prevalent in
southeast Asia, while Mahayana has spread over the
northern area (China, Vietnam, Korea, Japan...)

(G.C.C. Chang).

Lotus Grades

The nine possible degrees of rebirth in the Western
Pure Land. The more merits and virtues the practitio-
ner accumulates, the higher the grade.

Lotus Sect

A Buddhist sect founded by the great Master Hui Yuan
about 390 A.D. at his monastery on Mount Lu in
Kiangsi Province in China. The Lotus Sect believes in
and honors Amitabha Buddha and declares that,
through the chanting of his name and by purifying and
finally ridding oneself of desire, one can be reborn in
the Pure Land. There one is born of a lotus, and, de-

134
pending on one’s degree of purification and practice,
one is born into one of the nine grades of the lotus:
upper superior, middle superior, lower superior, etc.

Lotus Sutra

Or Saddharma-pundarika, Dharma Flower, or “The
Lotus of the True Law.” The sutra is the basis for the
Lotus sect (T’1en-t’ai in Chinese). Among the sutras of
the Mahayana canon.

One of the earliest and most richly descriptive of the
Mahayana sutras of Indian origin. It became important
for the shaping of the Buddhist tradition in East Asia,
in particular because of its teaching of the One Vehicle
under which are subsumed the usual Hinayana [Thera-

vada] and Mahayana divisions. It is the main text of
the Tendai [T’ien T’ai] school. (Joji Okazaki.)

This School has a historically close relationship with
the Pure Land School. Thus, Master T’ai Hsu taught
that the Lotus Sutra and the Amitabha Sutras were
closely connected, differing only in length.

Lotus Treasury World
See “Ocean-Wide Lotus Assembly.”

135
A| Bi C| Di] Ef F] S| HA] | J] K] L] Ml
N] Of P| Q] RI S| Tl] Ul VI WI XY] Z|

Maha-Bodhisattva

Also, Mahasattva; a great Bodhisattva who has reached
the advanced stage of Enlightenment.

Mahakaruna

Great compassion.

Mahakasyapa

Also, Kasyapa; one of Buddha’s disciples. The Ch’an
Sect, according to its tradition, claims him as its first
patriarch.

Maharaja

A great or superior king.

Mahayama

The mother of Shakaymuni. She was a Koliyan Prin-
cess and married to Suddhodana.

136
Mahayana

Lit., great vehicle; the dominant Buddhist tradition of
East Asia. Special characteristics of Mahayana are
1. Emphasis on bodhisattva ideal, 2. The accession of
the Buddha to a superhuman status, 3. The develop-
ment of extensive philosophical inquiry to counter
Brahmanical and other scholarly argument, 4. The
development of elaborate devotional practice.

Mahasattva
See Maha-Bodhisattva.

Mahasthamaprapta (Shih Chih, Seishi)

One of the three sages in Pure Land Buddhism, recog-
nizable by the water jar (jeweled pitcher) adorning Her
crown. Usually represented in female form in East
Asian iconography. Amitabha Buddha is frequently
depicted standing between the Bodhisattvas Avalo-
kitesvara and Mahasthamaprapta.

Maitreya

Sanskrit word, literally means friendly and benevolent.
He will be the next Buddha in our world. He is now
preaching in Tusita Heaven. In China, he is usually
represented as the fat laughing Buddha.

137
Maitri

Loving-kindness.

Manas

The name of the seventh of the eight consciousnesses.
I refers to the faculty of thought, the intellectual func-
tion of consciousness.

Mani

A jewel, gem, precious stone; especially a pearl bead
or other globular ornament.

Mantra

A syllable, word or verse which has been revealed to a
seer in meditation, embodiment in sound of a deity;
spell or incantation.

Mara

Death; the slayer and foe of what is skillful and whole-
some. The Buddhist “Tempter”; the personification of
all evil and passion, whose baits and snares are the
sensory pleasures. Sometimes identified with the five
skandhas and with what is impermanent, suffering and
not-self; Devil, the Evil One, the Great Tempter; the

138
Demon King, who attempted to destroy Buddha and
Buddhism.

Marks

Characteristics, forms, physiognomy. Marks are con-
trasted with essence, in the same way that phenomena
are contrasted with noumenon. True Mark stands for
True Form, True Nature, Buddha Nature, always
unchanging. The True Mark of all phenomena is like
space: always existing but really empty; although
empty, really existing. The True Mark of the Triple
World is No-Birth/No-Death, not existent/not non-
existent, not like this/not like that. True Mark is also
called “Self-Nature,” “Dharma Body,” the “Uncondi-
tioned,” “True Thusness,” “Nirvana,” “Dharma
Realm.11 See also “Noumenon/Phenomena.”

Meditation Sutra

One of the three core sutras of the Pure Land school. It
teaches sixteen methods of visualizing Amiutabha
Buddha, the Bodhisattvas and the Pure Land. This
sutra stresses the element of meditation in Pure Land.

See also “Three Pure Land Sutras,” “Vaidehi,” “Visu-
alization.”

139
Merit and Virtue

These two terms are sometimes used interchangeably.
However, there is a crucial difference: merits are the
blessings (wealth, intelligence, etc.) of the human and
celestial realms; therefore, they are temporary and
subject to Birth and Death. Virtues, on the other hand,
transcend Birth and Death and lead to Buddhahood. Four
virtues are mentioned in Pure Land Buddhism: etemity;
happiness; True Self; purity. An identical action (e.g.,
charity) can lead either to merit or virtue, depending on
the mind of the practitioner, that is, on whether he is
seeking mundane rewards (merit) or transcendence
(virtue). Thus, the Pure Land cultivator should not seek
merits for by doing so, he would, in effect, be choosing
to remain within samsara. This would be counter to his
very wish to escape Birth and Death.

Middle Vehicle

Also called Middle Doctrine School or Madhyarnika;
one of the two main schools of Mahayana thought; it
upholds the Void as the only really real or independ-
ent, unconditioned Reality.

Mind
Key concept in all Buddhist teaching.

140
Frequent term in Zen, used in two senses: (1) the
mind-ground, the One Mind... the buddha-mind, the
mind of thusness... (2) false mind, the ordinary mind
dominated by conditioning, desire, aversion, igno-
rance, and false sense of self, the mind of delusion...

(J.C. Cleary, A Buddha from Korea. )

The ordinary, deluded mind (thought) includes feel-
ings, impressions, conceptions, consciousness, etc. The
Self-Nature True Mind is the fundamental nature, the
Original Face, reality, etc. As an analogy, the Self-
Nature True Mind is to mind what water is to waves —
the two cannot be dissociated. They are the same but
they are also different. To approach the sutras “making
discriminations and nurturing attachments is no differ-
ent from the Zen allegory of a person attempting to lift
a chair while seated on it. If he would only get off the
chair, he could raise it easily. Similarly, the practitio-
ner truly understands the Dharma only to the extent
that he “suspends the operation of the discriminating
intellect, the faculty of the internal dialogue through
which people from moment to moment define and
perpetuate their customary world of perception.” (See
this book, Introduction. )

See also the following passage:

141
The mind... “creates” the world in the sense that it
invests the phenomenal world with value. The remedy
to this situation, according to Buddhism, 1s to still the
mind, to stop it from making discriminations and
nurturing attachments toward certain phenomena and
feelings of aversion toward others. When this state of
calmness of mind is achieved, the darkness of igno-
rance and passion will be dispelled and the mind can
perceive the underlying unity of the absolute. The
individual will then have achieved the state of enlight-
enment and will be freed from the cycle of birth and
death, because such a person 1s now totally indifferent
to them both. (Burton Watson, The Zen Teachings of
Master Lin-Chi. )

Mindfulness of the Buddha

Synonymous with Buddha Recitation. See “Buddha
Recitation.”

Mount Sumeru

The central mountain of every universe. Also called
Wonderful Height, Wonderful Brilliancy, etc.

142
N

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N] Of P] Q] Ri S| T] Ul ViW! XI YI Z|

Nagarjuna (2nd/3rd cent.)

“One of the most important philosophers of Buddhism
and the founder of the Madhyamika school. Nagar-
juna’s major accomplishment was his systematization
of the teaching presented in the Prajnaparamita Sutras.
Nagarjuna’s methodological approach of rejecting all
opposites is the basis of the Middle Way (Shambhala
Dictionary of Buddhism and Zen.)

Narayana

Name of a deva, a strong, manly hero having divine
power.

Nirmanakaya
See “Three bodies of the Buddha.”

143
Nirvana

The deathless; the cessation of all suffering. The very
opposite of the Wheel of Birth-and-Death; it is what
those in the Buddhist tradition aspire to experience.
The Absolute, which transcends designation and
mundane characterization.

Nirvana Sutra

The last of the sutras in the Mahayana canon. It em-
phasizes the importance of Buddha-nature, which is
the same as Self-Nature.

Non-Birth (No-Birth)

“A term used to describe the nature of Nirvana. In
Mahayana Buddhism generally, No-Birth signifies the
‘extinction’ of the discursive thinking by which we
conceive of things as arising and perishing, forming
attachments to them.” (Ryukoku University.) See also
“Tolerance of Non-Birth.”

144
O

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ Of P[ Q| RI S| T Ul VW] X] YI 2]

Ocean-Wide Lotus Assembly

The Lotus Assembly represents the gathering of Bud-
dha Amitabha, the Bodhisattvas, the sages and saints
and all other superior beings in the Land of Ultimate
Bliss. This Assembly is “Ocean-Wide” as the partici-
pants are infinite in number — spreading as far and
wide as the ocean. The term Ocean-Wide Assembly is
generally associated with the Avatamsaka Sutra, a text
particularly prized by the Pure Land and Zen schools
alike.

Once-returner

A sage who has only one rebirth left before reaching
Arhatship and escaping birth and death.

One-Life Bodhisattva

A Bodhisattva who is one lifetime away from Buddha-
hood. The best known example is the Bodhisattva
Maitreya.

145
One-Vehicle Dharma

The one Yana, the vehicle of Oneness. The one
Buddhayana, the One Vehicle, 1.e., Mahayana, which
contains the final or complete Law of the Buddha and
not merely a part, or preliminary stage, as in Hinayana.

Other-Power

The issue of other-power (Buddhas’ power) is often
misunderstood and glossed over by many Buddhists.
However, it must be pointed out that, in Buddhism,
other-power is absolutely necessary if a Bodhisattva 1s
to attain Ultimate Enlightenment. The Lankavatara
Sutra (the only sutra recommended by Bodhidharma)
and the Avatamsaka Sutra (described by D.T. Suzuki
as the epitome of Buddhist thought) are emphatically
clear on this point:

As long as [conversion] is an experience and not mere
understanding, it is evident that self-discipline plays an
important role in the Buddhist life... but... we must
not forget the fact that the Lanka [Lankavatara Sutra]
also emphasizes the necessity of the Buddha’s power
being added to the Bodhisattvas’, in their upward
course of spiritual development and in the accom-
plishment of their great task of world salvation.

146
(Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki, tr., The Lankavatara Sutra, p.
XVII. )
The Avatamsaka Sutra states:

Having purified wisdom and means in the seventh
Stage...

The great sages attain acceptance of non-
origination...

On the basis of their previous resolution, the buddhas
further exhort them...:

“Though you have extinguished the burning of the
fire of affliction,

Having seen the world still afflicted, remember your
past vows;

Having thought of the welfare of the world, work in
quest

Of the cause of knowledge, for the liberation of the
world.”

(T. Cleary, tr., The Flower Ornament Sutra, Vol II, p. 86)

See also “Easy Path of Practice.”

147
Pp

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ O| P] Q| RIS} T Ul VW] xX] YI 2]

Parajika
Lit., defeat or the conditions leading to the defeat of

the Bodhicitta. Also. the conditions leading to the
defeat of the Bhiksu’s life.

Paramita

: Refers to the six practices, the perfection of which
ferries one beyond the sea of suffering and mortality to
Nirvana. The six Paramitas are the following:
(1) Dana, charity or giving, including the bestowing of
truth on others; (2) Sila, keeping the discipline;
(3) Ksanti, patience under suffering and _ insult;
(4) Virya, zeal and progress; (5) Dhyana, meditation or
contemplation; (6) Prajna, wisdom, the power to
discern reality or truth. It is the perfection of the last
one — Prajna — that ferries sentient beings across the
ocean of Samsara (the sea of incarnate life) to the
shores of Nirvana.

148
Parinirvana

The Buddha’s final Nirvana, entered by him at the time
of death.

Polar Mountain

In Buddhist cosmology, the universe is composed of
worlds upon worlds — ad infinitum. (Our earth is only a
small part of one of these worlds). The Polar Mountain
is the central mountain of each world.

Polaris

The North Star, polestar; star of the second magnitude,
standing alone and forming the end of the tail of the
constellation Ursa Minor; it marks very nearly the
position of the north celestial pole.

Prajna

True or transcendental wisdom. Last of the paramitas.
One of the highest attainments of Buddhist practice.

Pratyeka Buddha

A solitary Buddha; one who has achieved Awakening
through insight into the dependent origination of mind
and body. Pratyekabuddhas lead only solitary lives,

149
and they do not teach the Dharma to others nor do they
have any desire to do so.

Pretas

Hungry ghosts. who are tormented by continual and
unsatisfied cravings. The preta-realm is one of the
three states of woe (apaya-bhumi) and one of the six
realms of existence.

Priyavacana

Lit., loving or affectionate speech. This beautiful and
affectionate speech is one of the Four All- Embracing
Virtues and is used to lead sentient beings toward the
truth.

Pure Land

Generic term for the realms of the Buddhas. In this text
it denotes the Land of Ultimate Bliss or Western Land
of Amitabha Buddha. It is not a realm of enjoyment,
but rather an ideal place of cultivation, beyond the
Triple Realm and samsara, where those who are reborn
are no longer subject to retrogression. This is the key
distinction between the Western Pure Land and such
realms as the Tusita Heaven. There are two concep-
tions of the Pure Land: as different and apart from the

150
Saha World and as one with and the same as the Saha
World. When the mind is pure and undefiled, any land
or environment becomes a pure land (Vimalakirti,
Avatamsaka Sutras...). See also “Triple Realm.”

Pure Land School

When Mahayana Buddhism spread to China, Pure
Land ideas found fertile ground for development. In
the fourth century, the movement crystallized with the
formation of the Lotus Society, founded by Master Hui
Yuan (334-416), the first Pure Land Patriarch. The
school was formalized under the Patriarchs T’an Luan
(Donran) and Shan Tao (Zendo). Master Shan Tao’s
teachings, in particular, greatly influenced the devel-
opment of Japanese Pure Land, associated with Honen
Shonin (Jodo school) and his disciple, Shinran Shonin
(Jodo Shinshu school) in the 12th and 13th centuries.
Jodo Shinshu, or Shin Buddhism, places overwhelm-
ing emphasis on the element of faith.

[Pure Land comprises the schools] of East Asia which
emphasize aspects of Mahayana Buddhism stressing
faith in Amida, meditation on and recitation of his
name, and the religious goal of being reborn in his
“Pure Land” or “Western Paradise.” (Keith Crim. )

151
Note: An early form of Buddha Recitation can be
found in the Nikayas of the Pali Canon:

In the Nikayas, the Buddha... advised his disciples to
think of him and his virtues as if they saw his body
before their eyes, whereby they would be enabled to
accumulate merit and attain Nirvana or be saved from
transmigrating in the evil paths... (D.T. Suzuki, The
Eastern Buddhist, Vol.3, No.4, p.317.)

Pure Land Sutras

See “Three Pure Land Sutras.”

Q

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ Of P] Q] R] S| Tl] Ul ViW] X] YI Z|

R

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ Of P] Q] RI S| Tl] Ul Vi WT] X] YI Z|

152
S

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ Of P[ Q| Ri S| TU] VW] xX] YI 2]

Saddharma-pundarika

See entry under Lotus Sutra.

Saha World

World of Endurance. Refers to this world of ours,
filled with suffering and afflictions, yet gladly endured
by its inhabitants.

Sakra

God of the sky who fights the demons with his vajra,
or thunderbolt.

Sage

A wise and virtuous person, an accomplished one who
is second in rank to a saint.

Sala

Or Salavana, the grove of sal(teak) trees near Kusina-
gara, the place of the Buddha’s death.

153
Samadhi

Deep concentration: the state of one-pointedness of
mind characterized by peace and imperturbability.
Samadhi is also one of the Paramitas and is indispen-
sable on the path to Bodhi.

Samanarthata

Cooperation with and adaptation to others for the sake
of leading them towards the truth. Samanarthata is one
of the Four All-Embracing Virtues. Samantabhadra
Also called Universal Worthy or, in Japanese, Fugen.
A major Bodhisattva, who personifies the transcenden-
tal practices and vows of the Buddhas (as compared to
the Bodhisattva Manjusri, who represents transcenden-
tal wisdom). Usually depicted seated on an elephant
with six tusks (six paramitas). Best known for his “Ten
Great Vows.”

Samatha

Quiet, tranquillity, calmness of mind, absence of mind.

Sambhogakaya
See “Three bodies of the Buddha.”

154
Samsara
Cycle of rebirths; realms of Birth and Death.

Samyak Sambodhi

Correct universal intelligence; correct, equal or univer-
sal Enlightenment.

Sangha

Lit., harmonious community. In the Buddhadharma,
Sangha means the order of Bhiksus, Bhiksunis, Sra-
maneras and Sramanerikas. Another meaning is the
Arya Sangha, made up of those individuals, lay or
monastic, who have attained one of the four stages of
sanctity. Also, the Bodhisattva Sangha.

Sangharama Body

A monastery with its garden or grove, a universal
body.

Sanskrit

Learned language of India. Canonical texts of Maha-
yana Buddhism in its Indian stage were written in
Sanskrit.

155
Sariputra

Major disciple of Shakyamuni Buddha, foremost in
wisdom among His Arhat disciples.

Sastra

Commentary; the commentaries constitute one of the
three parts of the Buddhist canonical scriptures.

Self-Nature

One’s own Original Nature, one’s own Buddha Nature.

Self-Power
See “Difficult Path of Practice.”

Seven Treasures

Gold, silver, lapis lazuli, crystal, agate, red pearl and
camelian. They represent the seven powers of faith,
perseverance, sense of shame, avoidance of wrongdo-
ing, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom.

Siddham

Blessed, endowed with supernatural faculties. This
same term refers to the Sankrit alphabet also and 1s,
likewise, transliterated as Hsi-ta in Chinese.

156
Siddhanta

The four siddhanta. The Buddha taught by (1) mun-
dane of ordinary modes of expression; (2)individual
treatment, adapting his teaching to the capacity of his
hearers; (3) diagnostic treatment of their moral dis-
eases; and (4) the perfect and highest truth.

Siksamana

A lay-disciple who maintains the eight precepts, either
temporarily or as preparation for leaving home.

Sila
Moral precepts. These number 5,8,10,250 or 350.
Also, one of the Paramitas.

Six Directions

North, South, East, West, above and below, i.e., all
directions. In the Avatamsaka Sutra, they are expanded
to include points of the compass in between and are
referred to as the Ten Directions.

Six Dusts

See “Dusts.”’

157
Six Organs

The six indriyas, or sense organs: eye, ear, nose,
tongue, body and mind.

Six Paramitas

See “Paramita”’

Six Planes of Existence (Six Paths)

The paths within the realm of Birth and Death. In-
cludes the three Evil Paths (hells, hungry ghosts,
animality) and the paths of humans, asuras and celes-

tials. These paths can be understood as states of mind.
See also “Evil Paths.”

Sixth Patriarch

Hui Neng (638-713), the Sixth Patriarch of the Chinese
Zen school and author of the Platform Sutra.

Skandhas

As taught by the Buddha, the skandhas are the compo-
nents of the human so-called entity that is constantly
changing. They are: 1. Name/form; 2. Feeling; 3. Con-
ception; 4. Impulse; 5. Consciousness.

158
Skillful Means

See “Expedient Means.”

Small Vehicle

See entry under Hinayana.

Spiritual power

Also called miraculous power. Includes, inter alia, the
ability to see all forms (deva eye), to hear all sounds
(deva ear), to know the thoughts of others, to be any-
where and do anything at will.

Sramana

Lit., laborer; applied to those who wholeheartedly
practice toward enlightenment; root word of the desig-
nation for novice monk.

Sramanera

A novice monk holding the 10 precepts.

Sramanerika

A novice nun holding the 10 precepts.

159
Sravakas

“Lit., ‘voice-hearers’: those who follow [Theravada]
and eventually become arhats as a result of listening to
the buddhas and following their teachings” (A. Buzo
and T. Prince.) See also “Arhat.”

Sudhana (Good Wealth)

The main protagonist in the next-to-last and longest
chapter of the Avatamsaka Sutra. Seeking Enlighten-
ment, he visited and studied with fifty-three spiritual
advisors and became the equal of the Buddhas in one
lifetime. Both his first advisor and his last advisor
(Samantabhadra) taught him the Pure Land path.

Suddhodana

Pure Rice King, the father of Shakyamuni, ruled over
the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu on the Nepalese border.

Sudra

The lowest of the four Hindi Castes at the time of
Shakyamuni. They were peasants, slaves and serfs.

Sumeru

Lit., exalted, excellent; the mythical “world mountain”
that rises through the center of a Buddhist universe.

160
Surangama Sutra
Also called Heroic Gate Sutra.

The “Sutra of the Heroic One” exercised a great influ-
ence on the development of Mahayana Buddhism in
China [and neighboring countries]. It emphasizes the
power of samadhi, through which enlightenment can
be attained, and explains the various methods of emp-
tiness meditation through the practice of which every-
one... can realize... enlightenment (Shambhala Dic-
tionary of Buddhism and Zen.)

Sutra

An aphorism; a thread of suggestive words or phrases
summarizing religious and philosophical instruction.
In buddhism, it refers to a discourse by the Buddha or
one of his major disciples. The Sutra collection is one
of the three divisions of the Buddhist scriptures.

161
T

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ O} P[ Q| Ri S| T Ul VW] xX] YI 2]

Tao

Path or Way. The Sanskrit equivalent to this Chinese
term is marga.

Tathagata

Usually translated as “Thus Come One.” He who came
as did all Buddhas, who took the absolute way of cause

and effect, and attained to perfect wisdom; one of the
highest titles of a Buddha (Charles Luk).

Ten Directions

North, South. East, West; N-F, N-W, S-F, S-W, Zenith
and Nadir.

Ten Evil Acts (Ten Evil Deeds, Ten Sins)

1. Killing; 2.stealing; 3. sexual misconduct; 4. lying;
5. slander; 6. coarse language; 7. empty chatter;
8. covetousness; 9. angry speech; 10. wrong views.
See also “Ten Precepts.”

162
Ten Great Vows

The famous vows of the Bodhisattva Samantabhadra in
the Avatamsaka Sutra. These vows represent the
quintessence of this Sutra and are the basis of all
Mahayana practice. Studying the vows and putting
them into practice is tantamount to studying the
Avatamsaka Sutra and practicing its teachings. See
also “Samantabhadra.”’

Ten Precepts

Include an expanded version of the Five Precepts of
body and mouth (not to kill, steal, engage in illicit sex,
lie, or take intoxicants) with the addition of the virtues
of the mind (elimination of greed, anger and delusion).
See also “Five Precepts,” “Ten Evil Acts.”

Ten Stages of a Bodhisattva’s Progress

They are the following: (1) Joy at having overcome
former difficulties and at now entering the path to
Buddhahood; (2) Freedom from all possible defile-
ment, the stage of purity; (3) The stage of further
enlightenment; (4) Glowing wisdom; (5) Mastery of
the utmost or final difficulties; (6) The open way of
wisdom that is beyond purity and impurity; (7) Pro-
ceeding afar, above the concept of “self” in order to

163
save others; (8) Attainment of calm imperturbability;
(9) Achievement of the finest discriminatory wisdom;
knowing, expediently, where and how to save; pos-
sessing the ten powers; (10) Attainment of the fertiliz-
ing powers of the Law Cloud.

Ten Virtues

The virtuous modes of behavior, which are the positive
counterparts to the Five Precepts. The Grades of Bo-
dhisattva Faith 1) The stage of Bodhisattva faith;
2) The stage of rememberance or unforgetfulness;
3) The stage of zealous progress; 4) The stage of
wisdom; 5) The stage of Dhyana; 6) The stage of non-
retrogression; 7) The stage of protection of the
Dharma; 8) The stage of reflective powers; 9) The
stage of discipline (sila); 10) The stage of the mind of
high resolve.

The Stages Before Attainment

1) The purposive stage; 2) The stage of control of the
mind-ground; 3) the stage of Bodhisattva practice;
4) The stage of noble birth; 5) The stage of all-in-
readiness for Enlightenment; 6) The stage of the whole
mind becoming Buddha-like; 7) The stage of non-
retrogression; 8) The stage of Bodhi in its infancy;

164
9) The stage of the heir to the King of the Law;
10) The stage of investiture.

Theravada

Lit., the School of the Elders; one of the two main
forms of Buddhism known in the world today; prac-
ticed chiefly in south-east Asia; has the Pali Canon for
textual foundation; this tradition advocates the Ara-
hantship.

Third Lifetime

In the first lifetime, the practitioner engages in mun-
dane good deeds which bring ephemeral worldly
blessings (wealth, power, authority, etc.) in the second
lifetime. Since power tends to corrupt, he is likely to
create evil karma, resulting in retribution in the third
lifetime. Thus, good deeds in the first lifetime are
potential “enemies” of the third lifetime. To ensure
that mundane good deeds do not become “enemies the
practitioner should dedicate all merits to a
transcendental goal, 1.e., to become Bodhisattvas or

Buddhas or, in Pure Land teaching, to achieve rebirth
in the Pure Land — a Buddha land beyond Birth and

Peat. undane context, these three lifetimes can be
conceived of as three generations. Thus, the patriarch

165
of a prominent family, through work and luck, amasses
great power, fortune and influence (first lifetime). His
children are then able to enjoy a leisurely, and, too
often, dissipated life (second lifetime). By the genera-
tion of the grandchildren, the family’s fortune and
good reputation have all but disappeared (third life-
time).

Thirty-seven Limbs of Enlightenment

These are: a. the four mindfulnesses; b. the four right
efforts; c. the four bases of miraculous powers; d. the
five roots; e. the five powers; f. the seven factors of
enlightenment; and g. the eightfold noble path (G.C.C.
Chang).

Thirty-two Laksanas

The physical marks of a Cakravarti (Wheel-King),
especially of the Buddha.

Three bodies of the Buddha (Skt. trikaya)

1. Dharmakaya: The Dharma-body, or the “body of
reality”, which is formless, unchanging, transcenden-
tal, and inconceivable. Synonymous with suchness, or
emptiness.

166
2. Sambhogakaya: the “body of enjoyment’, the celes-
tial body of the Buddha. Personification of eternal
perfection in its ultimate sense. It “resides” in the Pure
Land and never manifests itself in the mundane world,
but only in the celestial spheres, accompanied by
enlightened Bodhisattvas.

3. Nirmanakaya: the “incarnated body” of the Buddha.
In order to benefit certain sentient beings, a Buddha
incarnates himself into an appropriate visible body,
such as that of Sakyamuni Buddha.

The incarnated body of the Buddha should not be
confused with a magically produced Buddha. The
former 1s a real, tangible human body which has a
definite life span, The latter is an illusory Buddha-form
which is produced with miraculous powers and can be
withdrawn with miraculous powers (G.C.C. Chang).

Three Evil Paths
See “Evil Paths.”

Three Jewels (Three Precious Ones, Three Treasures)

In Sanskrit, Rathatraya. Buddha, Dharma and Sangha;
sometimes referred to as the Teacher, the Teaching and
the Taught.

167
Three Karmas

The three conditions, inheritances or karmas, of which
there are several groups, including the karmas of
deeds, words and thoughts.

Three Poisons

Craving, aversion and delusion; also, these are termed
the three root-stains or the three roots of unskillfulness.

Three Pure Land Sutras

Pure Land Buddhism is based on three basic sutras:

a) Amitabha Sutra (or Shorter Amitabha Sutra, or
Smaller Sukhavati-Vyuha, or the Sutra of Amida);

b) Longer Amitabha Sutra (or Longer Sukhavati-
Vyuha, or the Teaching of Infinite Life);

c) Meditation Sutra (or the Meditation on the Buddha
of Infinite Life, or the Amitayus Dhyana Sutra).

Sometimes the last chapter of the Avatamsaka Sutra
(“The Practices and Vows of the Bodhisattva Saman-
tabhadra”’) is considered the fourth basic sutra of the
Pure Land tradition. Note: in Pure Land, the Longer
Amitabha Sutra is considered a shorter form of the
Lotus Sutra.

168
Three Realms (Triple Realm, Three Worlds)

The realms of desire (our world), form (realms of the
lesser deities) and formlessness (realms of the higher
deities). The Western Pure Land is outside the Triple

Realm, beyond samsara and retrogression. See also
“Pure Land.”

Three Refuges

Taking refuge and possessing confidence in the Bud-
dha’s Awakening, in his Teaching and in the Sangha of
enlightened disciples.

Three Vehicles

The yanas of Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas and Bodhi-
Sattvas.

T’ien T’ai (Tendai) School

A major school that takes the Lotus Sutra as its princi-
pal text. Historically, it has had a close relationship
with Pure Land. See also “Lotus Sutra.”

Tolerance of Non-Birth

“Tolerance” (insight) that comes from the knowledge
that all phenomena are unborn. Sometimes translated

169
as “insight into the non-origination of all exis-
tence/non-origination of the dharmas.”

A Mahayana Buddhist term for the insight into empti-
ness, the non-origination or birthlessness of things or
beings realized by Bodhisattvas who have attained the
eighth Stage [Ground] of the path to Buddhahood.
When a Bodhisattva realizes this insight he has at-
tained the stage of non-retrogression. (Ryukoku Uni-
versity.)

The Pure Land School teaches that anyone reborn in
the Pure Land attains the Tolerance of Non-Birth and
reaches the stage of non-retrogression, never to fall
back into samsara. See also “Non-Birth.”

Transference of Merit

The concept of merit transference, or sharing one’s
own merits and virtues with others, is reflected in the
following passage:

Some of us may ask whether the effect of [evil] karma
can be... [changed] by repeating the name of Kuan-
Yin. This question is tied up with that of rebirth in
Sukhavati [the Pure Land] and it may be answered by
saying that invocation of Kuan-Yin’s name forms
another cause which will right away offset the previous

170
karma. We know, for example) that if there is a dark,
heavy cloud above, the chances are that it will rain.
But we also know that if a strong wind should blow,
the cloud will be carried away somewhere else and we
will not feel the rain. Similarly, the addition of one big
factor can alter the whole course of karma.

It is only by accepting the idea of life as one whole that
both Theravadins and Mahayanists can advocate the
practice of transference of merit to others. With the
case of Kuan-Yin then, by calling on Her name we
identify ourselves with Her and as a result of this
identification, Her merits flow over to us. These merits
which are now ours then counterbalance our bad karma
and save us from calamity. The law of cause and effect
still stands good. All that has happened 1s that a power-
ful and immensely good karma has overshadowed the
weaker one. (Lecture on Kuan-Yin by Tech Eng Soon
- Penang Buddhist Association, c. 1960. Pamphlet.)

Triloka or Trailoka

See “Threee Realms.”

Tripitaka

Lit., three baskets: The earliest Buddhist canonical text
consisting of three sections: 1. Buddha’s discourses

171
(sutras), 2 Rules of Discipline (Vinaya), 3. Analytical
and explanatory texts or commentaries (sastras);
usually referred to as the Pali canon.

Triple Jewel

See “Three Treasures.”

Twelve Nidanas

The twelve links in the chain of existence or causation;
they are as follows: 1) Avidya, ignorance or unenlight-
enment; 2) Samskara, action, activity, conception,
“dispositions”; 3) Vijnana, consciousness; 4) Nama-
rupa, name and form; 5) Sadayatana, the six sense
organs, 1.e., eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind;
6) Sparsa, contact, touch; 7) Vedana, sensation, feel-
ing; 8) Trsna, thirst, desire, existing; 9) Upadana,
laying hold of, grasping; 10) Bhava, being, existing;
11) Jati, birth; 12) Jaramarana, old age and death.

Two Truths

1) Relative or conventional, everyday truth of the
mundane world subject to delusion and dichotomies
and 2) the Ultimate Truth, transcending dichotomies,
as taught by the Buddhas.

172
According to Buddhism, there are two kinds of Truth,
the Absolute and the Relative. The Absolute Truth (of
the Void) manifests “illumination but is always still,”
and this is absolutely inexplicable. On the other hand,
the Relative Truth (of the Unreal) manifests “stillness
but is always illuminating,” which means that it is
immanent in everything. (Hsu Heng Chi/P.H. Wei).

Pure Land thinkers such as the Patriarch Tao Ch’o
accepted “the legitimacy of Conventional Truth as an
expression of Ultimate Truth and as a vehicle to reach
Ultimate Truth. Even though all form is nonform, it is
acceptable and necessary to use form within the limits
of causality, because its use is an expedient means of
saving others out of one’s compassion for them and
because, even for the unenlightened, the use of form
can lead to the revelation of form as nonform” (David
Chappell). Thus to reach Buddhahood, which is form-
less, the cultivator can practice the Pure Land method
based on form.

Tzung

A term originally used to mean “sect’’, but later appro-
priated by the intuitional school known as Ch’an
(Japanese, Zen) for use in special contexts.

173
U

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ Of P{ Q| Ri S| T Ul Vi WI] X] YI Z|

Unconditioned (Transcendental)

Anything “without outflows,” 1.e., free of the three
marks of greed, anger and delusion. See also “Condi-
tioned.”

Upasaka/Upasika

Buddhist lay disciple (man/woman), who formally
received five precepts or rules of conduct.

174
V

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ Of P[ Q| Ri S| T Ul VIEW] xX] YI 2]

Vaidehi

The Queen of King Bimbisara of Magadha, India. It
was in response to her entreaties that Buddha Shakya-
muni preached the Meditation Sutra, which teaches a
series of sixteen visualizations (of Amitabha Buddha,
the Pure Land...) leading to rebirth. in the Land of
Ultimate Bliss.

Vaidurya

A precious substance, perhaps lapis lazuli or beryl.

Vairocana

The main Buddha in the Avatamsaka Sutra. Represents
the Dharma Body of Buddha Shakyaniuni and all

Buddhas. His Pure Land is the Flower Store World,
1.e., the entire cosmos.

175
Vaisravana

One of the four maharaja-deva graudians of the first or
lowest devaloka on its four sides. Vaisravana guards
the north.

Vaisya

The third of the four Hindi Castes at the time of
Shakyamuni. They were merchant, entrepreneurs,
traders, farmers, manufacturers, etc., but not well-
educated.

Varuna

God of the sea and of the waters; guardian of the
western quarter of the compass.

Veda

True or sacred knowledge or lore; name of celebrated
works which constitute the basis of the first period of
the Hindu religion.

Vimalakirti Sutra

Also called Vimalakirti Nirdesa Sutra. A key Maha-
yana sutra particularly popular with Zen and to a lesser
extent Pure Land followers. The main protagonist is a
layman named Vimalakirti who is the equal of many

176
Bodhisattvas in wisdom, eloquence, etc. He explained
the teaching of Emptiness in terms of non- duality...
“The true nature of things is beyond the limiting con-
cepts imposed by words.” Thus, when asked by Man-
jusri to define the non-dual Truth, Vimalakirti simply
remained silent.

Vinaya

Disciplined conduct, referring specifically to the
monastic rules for the disciples who have left home;
also, one of the three divisions of the Buddhist scrip-
tures.

Vipasyana

Discernment; also, insight, correct perception or view.

Virtue
See “Merit and Virtue.”

Virya: Energy

The energy necessary to maintain and progress in
spiritual development. Also, one of the Paramitas.

Visualization

See Meditation Sutra for explanation.

177
The visualizations [in the Meditation Sutra] are distin-
guished into sixteen kinds [shifting from earthly scenes
to Pure Land scenes at the third Visualization]:
(1) visualization of the sun, (2) visualization of water,
(3) visualization of the ground [in the Pure Land],
(4) visualization of the trees, (5) visualization of the
lake[s], (6) unified visualization of the [50 billion]
storied-pavilions, trees, lakes, and _ so _ forth,
(7) visualization of the [lotus throne of Amiutabha
Buddha], (8) visualization of the images of the Buddha
[Amitabha] and Bodhisattvas [Avalokitesvara and
Mahasthamaprapta], (9) visualization of the [Reward
body of Amitabha Buddha, i.e., the form in which He
appears in the Pure Land], (10) visualization of Avalo-
kitesvara, (11) visualization of Mahasthamaprapta,
(12) visualization of one’s own rebirth, (13) [see
below], (14) visualization of the rebirth of the highest
grades, (15) visualization of the rebirth of the middle
grades and (16) visualization of the rebirth of the
lowest grades. (K.K. Tanaka, The Dawn of Chinese
Pure Land Doctrine.)

The 13th Visualization has been summarized as fol-
lows:

If one cannot visualize the [Reward body of Amitabha
Buddha], focus on the small body, which is sixteen

178
cubits high (the traditional height of Shakyamuni while
he dwelt on earth); contemplate an intermingling of the
[Reward] and small bodies. (Ioji1 Okazaki, p.52.)

Visualizations 14-16 refer to the nine lotus grades (of
rebirth), divided into three sets of three grades each.

W

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ Of P] Q] R] S| Tl] Ul VE WI X] YI Z|

Way (Path, Tao)

The path leading to Supreme Enlightenment, to
Buddhahood.

Wisdom-life

The life of a Buddha or Bodhisattva, which is sus-
tained by wisdom, just as the life of an ordinary being
is sustained by food.

179
X

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ Of P[ Q| Ri S| Tl Ul Vi WI] XX] YI 2]

Y

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ Of P] Q] R] S| TI] Ul ViW] X] ¥] 2!

Yama

In the Vedas, the god of the dead.

Yana

Sanskrit term, commonly translated as vehicle; means
spiritual vehicle, path or career.

Yasodhara

The wife of Siddhartha Goutama. Later became a nun.

180
Yogacara School.

Another name for the Mind-Only school, founded in the
fourth century by the brothers Asanga and Vasubandhu.

Z

A| Bi] C] D] Ef Fl G] HY I J] K] LY] M|
N[ Of P[ Q] Ri S} Tl Ul] ViW] X] Y| 2|

Zen

A major school of Mahayana Buddhism, with several
branches. One of its most popular techniques is medi-
tation on koans, which leads to the generation of the
Great Doubt. According to this method:

The master gives the student a koan to think about,
resolve, and then report back on to the master. Concen-
tration intensifies as the student first tries to solve the
koan intellectually. This initial effort proves impossi-
ble, however, for a koan cannot be solved rationally.
Indeed, it is a kind of spoof on the human intellect.
Concentration and irrationality — these two elements
constitute the characteristic psychic situation that
engulfs the student wrestling with a koan. As this

181
persistent effort to concentrate intellectually becomes
unbearable, anxiety sets in. The entirety of one’s
consciousness and psychic life is now filled with one
thought. The exertion of the search is like wrestling
with a deadly enemy or trying to make one’s way
through a ring of flames. Such assaults on the fortress
of human reason inevitably give rise to a distrust of all
rational perception. This gnawing doubt [Great Doubt],
combined with a futile search for a way out, creates a
state of extreme and intense yearning for deliverance.
The state may persist for days, weeks or even years;

eventually the tension has to break. (Dumoulin, Zen
Buddhism, Vol. I, p.253.)

An interesting koan is the koan of Buddha Recitation.
Unlike other koans, it works in two ways. First of all,
if a cultivator succeeds in his meditation through this
koan, he can achieve awakening as with other koans.
However, if he does not succeed, and experience
shows that many cultivators do not, then the medita-
tion on the Buddha’s narne helps him to achieve re-
birth in the Pure Land. This 1s so provided he believes
(as most practitioners in Asia do) in Amitabha and the
expedient Pure Land. Thus, the Buddha Recitation
koan provides a safety net, and demonstrates the
underlying unity of Zen and Pure Land.

182


This is a good article. Click here for more information.
Jellyfish
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This article is about the aquatic animal-form. For similar animals, see gelatinous zooplankton. For other uses, see Jellyfish (disambiguation).

Jellyfish
Pacific sea nettle ("Chrysaora fuscescens")
Pacific sea nettle (Chrysaora fuscescens)
Scientific classificationEdit this classification
Kingdom: 	Animalia
Phylum: 	Cnidaria
Subphylum: 	Medusozoa
Groups included

    Acraspeda
        Cubozoa—box jellyfish
        Scyphozoa—true jellyfish
        Staurozoa—stalked jellyfish
    some Hydrozoa—small jellyfish

Cladistically included but traditionally excluded taxa

    some Hydrozoa, such as Hydra

File:Mastigias papua - Tokyosealifepark - 2019 1 8.webmPlay media
Spotted jellies swimming in a Tokyo aquarium

Jellyfish and sea jellies are the informal common names given to the medusa-phase of certain gelatinous members of the subphylum Medusozoa, a major part of the phylum Cnidaria. Jellyfish are mainly free-swimming marine animals with umbrella-shaped bells and trailing tentacles, although a few are anchored to the seabed by stalks rather than being mobile. The bell can pulsate to provide propulsion for highly efficient locomotion. The tentacles are armed with stinging cells and may be used to capture prey and defend against predators. Jellyfish have a complex life cycle; the medusa is normally the sexual phase, which produces planula larva that disperse widely and enter a sedentary polyp phase before reaching sexual maturity.

Jellyfish are found all over the world, from surface waters to the deep sea. Scyphozoans (the "true jellyfish") are exclusively marine, but some hydrozoans with a similar appearance live in freshwater. Large, often colorful, jellyfish are common in coastal zones worldwide. The medusae of most species are fast-growing, and mature within a few months then die soon after breeding, but the polyp stage, attached to the seabed, may be much more long-lived. Jellyfish have been in existence for at least 500 million years,[1] and possibly 700 million years or more, making them the oldest multi-organ animal group.[2]

Jellyfish are eaten by humans in certain cultures. They are considered a delicacy in some Asian countries, where species in the Rhizostomae order are pressed and salted to remove excess water. Australian researchers have described them as a "perfect food", sustainable, and protein-rich but relatively low-calorie.[3]

They are also used in research, where the green fluorescent protein used by some species to cause bioluminescence has been adapted as a fluorescent marker for genes inserted into other cells or organisms.

The stinging cells used by jellyfish to subdue their prey can injure humans. Many thousands of swimmers are stung every year, with effects ranging from mild discomfort to serious injury or even death; small box jellyfish are responsible for many of these deaths. When conditions are favourable, jellyfish can form vast swarms, which can be responsible for damage to fishing gear by filling fishing nets, and sometimes clog the cooling systems of power and desalination plants which draw their water from the sea.

Contents

    1 Names
    2 Mapping to taxonomic groups
        2.1 Phylogeny
            2.1.1 Definition
            2.1.2 Medusozoan jellyfish
        2.2 Taxonomy
        2.3 Fossil history
    3 Anatomy
    4 Largest and smallest
    5 Life history and behavior
        5.1 Life cycle
        5.2 Lifespan
        5.3 Locomotion
    6 Ecology
        6.1 Diet
        6.2 Predation
        6.3 Symbiosis
        6.4 Blooms
        6.5 Habitats
        6.6 Parasites
    7 Relation to humans
        7.1 Fisheries
        7.2 Products
        7.3 Biotechnology
        7.4 Aquarium display
        7.5 Stings
        7.6 Mechanical issues
    8 See also
    9 References
    10 Further reading
    11 External links

Names

The name jellyfish, in use since 1796,[4] has traditionally been applied to medusae and all similar animals including the comb jellies (ctenophores, another phylum).[5][6] The term jellies or sea jellies is more recent, having been introduced by public aquaria in an effort to avoid use of the word "fish" with its modern connotation of an animal with a backbone, though shellfish, cuttlefish and starfish are not vertebrates either.[7][8] In scientific literature, "jelly" and "jellyfish" have been used interchangeably.[9][10] Many sources refer to only scyphozoans as "true jellyfish".[11]

A group of jellyfish is called a "smack".[12]
Mapping to taxonomic groups
A purple-striped jellyfish at the Monterey Bay Aquarium
Phylogeny
Definition

The term jellyfish broadly corresponds to medusae,[4] that is, a life-cycle stage in the Medusozoa. The American evolutionary biologist Paulyn Cartwright gives the following general definition:

    Typically, medusozoan cnidarians have a pelagic, predatory jellyfish stage in their life cycle; staurozoans are the exceptions [as they are stalked].[13]

The Merriam-Webster dictionary defines jellyfish as follows:

    A free-swimming marine coelenterate that is the sexually reproducing form of a hydrozoan or scyphozoan and has a nearly transparent saucer-shaped body and extensible marginal tentacles studded with stinging cells.[14]

Given that jellyfish is a common name, its mapping to biological groups is inexact. Some authorities have called the comb jellies[15] and certain salps[15] jellyfish, though other authorities state that neither of these are jellyfish, which they consider should be limited to certain groups within the medusozoa.[16][17]

The non-medusozoan clades called jellyfish by some but not all authorities (both agreeing and disagreeing citations are given in each case) are indicated with "???" on the following cladogram of the animal kingdom:
Animalia 	
  	

Porifera
 
  	
  	

Ctenophora (comb jellies)[15] ???[16] LightRefractsOf comb-rows of ctenophore Mertensia ovum.jpg
 
  	
  	

Cnidaria Cauliflour Jellyfish, Cephea cephea at Marsa Shouna, Red Sea, Egypt SCUBA.jpg (includes jellyfish and other jellies)
 
Bilateria 	
  	

Protostomia
 
Deuterostomia 	
  	

Ambulacraria
 
Chordata 	
  	

Tunicata (includes salps)[15] ???[17] Thalia democratica.jpg
 
  	

Vertebrata
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medusozoan jellyfish

Jellyfish are not a clade, as they include most of the Medusozoa, barring some of the Hydrozoa.[18][19] The medusozoan groups included by authorities are indicated on the following phylogenetic tree by the presence of citations. Names of included jellyfish, in English where possible, are shown in boldface; the presence of a named and cited example indicates that at least that species within its group has been called a jellyfish.
Cnidaria 	
  	

Anthozoa (corals)
 
  	
  	

Polypodiozoa and Myxozoa (parasitic cnidarians)
 
Medusozoa 	
Acraspeda 	
  	

Staurozoa (stalked jellyfish)[20] Haliclystus stejnegeri 1.jpg
 
Rhopaliophora 	
  	

Cubozoa (box jellyfish)[15] Carybdea marsupialis screenshot 6.png
 
Scyphozoa 	
  	

Discomedusae[15] Phyllorhiza punctata macro II.jpg
 
  	

Coronatae (crown jellyfish)[21] Nausithoe aurea.jpg
 
(true jellyfish[18])
 
 
Hydrozoa 	
  	
  	

Aplanulata Hydra-Foto.jpg
 
  	
  	

Siphonophorae Portuguese Man-O-War (Physalia physalis).jpg
 
  	
  	

Some Leptothecata[15] e.g. crystal jelly Aequorea3.jpeg
 
  	

Filifera[15] e.g. red paper lantern jellyfish[22] Red-paper-lantern-jellyfish-Karen-Osborn-Smithsonian-Institution.png
 
 
 
 
Trachylinae 	
  	

Limnomedusae, e.g. flower hat jelly[15] Olindias formosa1.jpg
 
  	

Narcomedusae, e.g. cosmic jellyfish[23] Expl0393 - Flickr - NOAA Photo Library.jpg
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taxonomy

The subphylum Medusozoa includes all cnidarians with a medusa stage in their life cycle. The basic cycle is egg, planula larva, polyp, medusa, with the medusa being the sexual stage. The polyp stage is sometimes secondarily lost. The subphylum include the major taxa, Scyphozoa (large jellyfish), Cubozoa (box jellyfish) and Hydrozoa (small jellyfish), and excludes Anthozoa (corals and sea anemones).[24] This suggests that the medusa form evolved after the polyps.[25] Medusozoans have tetramerous symmetry, with parts in fours or multiples of four.[24]

The four major classes of medusozoan Cnidaria are:

    Scyphozoa are sometimes called true jellyfish, though they are no more truly jellyfish than the others listed here. They have tetra-radial symmetry. Most have tentacles around the outer margin of the bowl-shaped bell, and long, oral arms around the mouth in the center of the subumbrella.[24]
    Cubozoa (box jellyfish) have a (rounded) box-shaped bell, and their velarium assists them to swim more quickly. Box jellyfish may be related more closely to scyphozoan jellyfish than either are to the Hydrozoa.[25]
    Hydrozoa medusae also have tetra-radial symmetry, nearly always have a velum (diaphragm used in swimming) attached just inside the bell margin, do not have oral arms, but a much smaller central stalk-like structure, the manubrium, with terminal mouth opening, and are distinguished by the absence of cells in the mesoglea. Hydrozoa show great diversity of lifestyle; some species maintain the polyp form for their entire life and do not form medusae at all (such as Hydra, which is hence not considered a jellyfish), and a few are entirely medusal and have no polyp form.[24]
    Staurozoa (stalked jellyfish) are characterized by a medusa form that is generally sessile, oriented upside down and with a stalk emerging from the apex of the "calyx" (bell), which attaches to the substrate. At least some Staurozoa also have a polyp form that alternates with the medusoid portion of the life cycle. Until recently, Staurozoa were classified within the Scyphozoa.[24]

There are over 200 species of Scyphozoa, about 50 species of Staurozoa, about 20 species of Cubozoa, and the Hydrozoa includes about 1000–1500 species that produce medusae, but many more species that do not.[26][27]
Fossil history
Fossil jellyfish, Rhizostomites lithographicus, one of the Scypho-medusae, from the Kimmeridgian (late Jurassic, 157 to 152 mya) of Solnhofen, Germany
Stranded scyphozoans on a Cambrian tidal flat at Blackberry Hill, Wisconsin.
The conulariid Conularia milwaukeensis from the Middle Devonian of Wisconsin.

Since jellyfish have no hard parts, fossils are rare. The oldest conulariid scyphozoans appeared between 635 and 577 mya in the Neoproterozoic of the Lantian Formation in China; others are found in the youngest Ediacaran rocks of the Tamengo Formation of Brazil, c. 505 mya, through to the Triassic. Cubozoans and hydrozoans appeared in the Cambrian of the Marjum Formation in Utah, USA, c. 540 mya.[28]
Anatomy
Labelled cross section of a jellyfish

The main feature of a true jellyfish is the umbrella-shaped bell. This is a hollow structure consisting of a mass of transparent jelly-like matter known as mesoglea, which forms the hydrostatic skeleton of the animal.[24] 95% or more of the mesogloea consists of water,[29] but it also contains collagen and other fibrous proteins, as well as wandering amoebocytes which can engulf debris and bacteria. The mesogloea is bordered by the epidermis on the outside and the gastrodermis on the inside. The edge of the bell is often divided into rounded lobes known as lappets, which allow the bell to flex. In the gaps or niches between the lappets are dangling rudimentary sense organs known as rhopalia, and the margin of the bell often bears tentacles.[24]
Anatomy of a scyphozoan jellyfish

On the underside of the bell is the manubrium, a stalk-like structure hanging down from the centre, with the mouth, which also functions as the anus, at its tip. There are often four oral arms connected to the manubrium, streaming away into the water below.[30] The mouth opens into the gastrovascular cavity, where digestion takes place and nutrients are absorbed. This is subdivided by four thick septa into a central stomach and four gastric pockets. The four pairs of gonads are attached to the septa, and close to them four septal funnels open to the exterior, perhaps supplying good oxygenation to the gonads. Near the free edges of the septa, gastric filaments extend into the gastric cavity; these are armed with nematocysts and enzyme-producing cells and play a role in subduing and digesting the prey. In some scyphozoans, the gastric cavity is joined to radial canals which branch extensively and may join a marginal ring canal. Cilia in these canals circulate the fluid in a regular direction.[24]
Discharge mechanism of a nematocyst

The box jellyfish is largely similar in structure. It has a squarish, box-like bell. A short pedalium or stalk hangs from each of the four lower corners. One or more long, slender tentacles are attached to each pedalium.[31] The rim of the bell is folded inwards to form a shelf known as a velarium which restricts the bell's aperture and creates a powerful jet when the bell pulsates, allowing box jellyfish to swim faster than true jellyfish.[24] Hydrozoans are also similar, usually with just four tentacles at the edge of the bell, although many hydrozoans are colonial and may not have a free-living medusal stage. In some species, a non-detachable bud known as a gonophore is formed that contains a gonad but is missing many other medusal features such as tentacles and rhopalia.[24] Stalked jellyfish are attached to a solid surface by a basal disk, and resemble a polyp, the oral end of which has partially developed into a medusa with tentacle-bearing lobes and a central manubrium with four-sided mouth.[24]

Most jellyfish do not have specialized systems for osmoregulation, respiration and circulation, and do not have a central nervous system. Nematocysts, which deliver the sting, are located mostly on the tentacles; true jellyfish also have them around the mouth and stomach.[32] Jellyfish do not need a respiratory system because sufficient oxygen diffuses through the epidermis. They have limited control over their movement, but can navigate with the pulsations of the bell-like body; some species are active swimmers most of the time, while others largely drift.[33] The rhopalia contain rudimentary sense organs which are able to detect light, water-borne vibrations, odour and orientation.[24] A loose network of nerves called a "nerve net" is located in the epidermis.[34][35] Although traditionally thought not to have a central nervous system, nerve net concentration and ganglion-like structures could be considered to constitute one in most species.[36] A jellyfish detects stimuli, and transmits impulses both throughout the nerve net and around a circular nerve ring, to other nerve cells. The rhopalial ganglia contain pacemaker neurones which control swimming rate and direction.[24]

In many species of jellyfish, the rhopalia include ocelli, light-sensitive organs able to tell light from dark. These are generally pigment spot ocelli, which have some of their cells pigmented. The rhopalia are suspended on stalks with heavy crystals at one end, acting like gyroscopes to orient the eyes skyward. Certain jellyfish look upward at the mangrove canopy while making a daily migration from mangrove swamps into the open lagoon, where they feed, and back again.[2] Box jellyfish have more advanced vision than the other groups. Each individual has 24 eyes, two of which are capable of seeing colour, and four parallel information processing areas that act in competition,[37] supposedly making them one of the few kinds of animal to have a 360-degree view of its environment.[38]
Largest and smallest

Jellyfish range from about one millimeter in bell height and diameter,[39] to nearly 2 metres (7 ft) in bell height and diameter; the tentacles and mouth parts usually extend beyond this bell dimension.[24]

The smallest jellyfish are the peculiar creeping jellyfish in the genera Staurocladia and Eleutheria, which have bell disks from 0.5 millimetres (1⁄32 in) to a few millimeters in diameter, with short tentacles that extend out beyond this, which these jellyfish use to move across the surface of seaweed or the bottoms of rocky pools;[39] many of these tiny creeping jellyfish cannot be seen in the field without a hand lens or microscope. They can reproduce asexually by fission (splitting in half). Other very small jellyfish, which have bells about one millimeter, are the hydromedusae of many species that have just been released from their parent polyps;[40] some of these live only a few minutes before shedding their gametes in the plankton and then dying, while others will grow in the plankton for weeks or months. The hydromedusae Cladonema radiatum and Cladonema californicum are also very small, living for months, yet never growing beyond a few mm in bell height and diameter.[41]
The lion's mane jellyfish (Cyanea capillata) is one of the largest species.

The lion's mane jellyfish, Cyanea capillata, was long-cited as the largest jellyfish, and arguably the longest animal in the world, with fine, thread-like tentacles that may extend up to 36.5 m (119 ft 9 in) long (though most are nowhere near that large).[42][43] They have a moderately painful, but rarely fatal, sting.[44] The increasingly common giant Nomura's jellyfish, Nemopilema nomurai, found in some, but not all years in the waters of Japan, Korea and China in summer and autumn is another candidate for "largest jellyfish", in terms of diameter and weight, since the largest Nomura's jellyfish in late autumn can reach 2 m (6 ft 7 in) in bell (body) diameter and about 200 kg (440 lb) in weight, with average specimens frequently reaching 0.9 m (2 ft 11 in) in bell diameter and about 150 kg (330 lb) in weight.[45][46] The large bell mass of the giant Nomura's jellyfish[47] can dwarf a diver and is nearly always much greater than the Lion's Mane, whose bell diameter can reach 1 m (3 ft 3 in).[48]

The rarely encountered deep-sea jellyfish Stygiomedusa gigantea is another candidate for "largest jellyfish", with its thick, massive bell up to 100 cm (3 ft 3 in) wide, and four thick, "strap-like" oral arms extending up to 6 m (20 ft) in length, very different from the typical fine, threadlike tentacles that rim the umbrella of more-typical-looking jellyfish, including the Lion's Mane.[49]
Life history and behavior
See also: Biological life cycle and Developmental biology
Illustration of two life stages of seven jelly species
The developmental stages of scyphozoan jellyfish's life cycle:
1–3 Larva searches for site
4–8 Polyp grows
9–11 Polyp strobilates
12–14 Medusa grows
Life cycle

Jellyfish have a complex life cycle which includes both sexual and asexual phases, with the medusa being the sexual stage in most instances. Sperm fertilize eggs, which develop into larval planulae, become polyps, bud into ephyrae and then transform into adult medusae. In some species certain stages may be skipped.[50]

Upon reaching adult size, jellyfish spawn regularly if there is a sufficient supply of food. In most species, spawning is controlled by light, with all individuals spawning at about the same time of day; in many instances this is at dawn or dusk.[51] Jellyfish are usually either male or female (with occasional hermaphrodites). In most cases, adults release sperm and eggs into the surrounding water, where the unprotected eggs are fertilized and develop into larvae. In a few species, the sperm swim into the female's mouth, fertilizing the eggs within her body, where they remain during early development stages. In moon jellies, the eggs lodge in pits on the oral arms, which form a temporary brood chamber for the developing planula larvae.[52]

The planula is a small larva covered with cilia. When sufficiently developed, it settles onto a firm surface and develops into a polyp. The polyp generally consists of a small stalk topped by a mouth that is ringed by upward-facing tentacles. The polyps resemble those of closely related anthozoans, such as sea anemones and corals. The jellyfish polyp may be sessile, living on the bottom, boat hulls or other substrates, or it may be free-floating or attached to tiny bits of free-living plankton[53] or rarely, fish[54][55] or other invertebrates. Polyps may be solitary or colonial.[56] Most polyps are only millimetres in diameter and feed continuously. The polyp stage may last for years.[24]

After an interval and stimulated by seasonal or hormonal changes, the polyp may begin reproducing asexually by budding and, in the Scyphozoa, is called a segmenting polyp, or a scyphistoma. Budding produces more scyphistomae and also ephyrae.[24] Budding sites vary by species; from the tentacle bulbs, the manubrium (above the mouth), or the gonads of hydromedusae.[53] In a process known as strobilation, the polyp's tentacles are reabsorbed and the body starts to narrow, forming transverse constrictions, in several places near the upper extremity of the polyp. These deepen as the constriction sites migrate down the body, and separate segments known as ephyra detach. These are free-swimming precursors of the adult medusa stage, which is the life stage that is typically identified as a jellyfish.[24][57] The ephyrae, usually only a millimeter or two across initially, swim away from the polyp and grow. Limnomedusae polyps can asexually produce a creeping frustule larval form, which crawls away before developing into another polyp.[24] A few species can produce new medusae by budding directly from the medusan stage. Some hydromedusae reproduce by fission.[53]
Lifespan

Little is known of the life histories of many jellyfish as the places on the seabed where the benthic forms of those species live have not been found. However, an asexually reproducing strobila form can sometimes live for several years, producing new medusae (ephyra larvae) each year.[58]

An unusual species, Turritopsis dohrnii, formerly classified as Turritopsis nutricula,[59] might be effectively immortal because of its ability under certain circumstances to transform from medusa back to the polyp stage, thereby escaping the death that typically awaits medusae post-reproduction if they have not otherwise been eaten by some other organism. So far this reversal has been observed only in the laboratory.[60]
Locomotion
Jellyfish locomotion is highly efficient. Muscles in the jellylike bell contract, setting up a start vortex and propelling the animal. When the contraction ends, the bell recoils elastically, creating a stop vortex with no extra energy input.

Using the moon jelly Aurelia aurita as an example, jellyfish have been shown to be the most energy efficient swimmers of all animals.[61] They move through the water by radially expanding and contracting their bell-shaped bodies to push water behind them. They pause between the contraction and expansion phases to create two vortex rings. Muscles are used for the contraction of the body, which creates the first vortex and pushes the animal forward, but the mesoglea is so elastic that the expansion is powered exclusively by relaxing the bell, which releases the energy stored from the contraction. Meanwhile, the second vortex ring starts to spin faster, sucking water into the bell and pushing against the centre of the body, giving a secondary and "free" boost forward. The mechanism, called passive energy recapture, only works in relatively small jellyfish moving at low speeds, allowing the animal to travel 30 percent farther on each swimming cycle. Jellyfish achieved a 48 percent lower cost of transport (food and oxygen intake versus energy spent in movement) than other animals in similar studies. One reason for this is that most of the gelatinous tissue of the bell is inactive, using no energy during swimming.[62][63][64]
Ecology
Diet

Jellyfish are like other cnidarians generally carnivorous (or parasitic),[65] feeding on planktonic organisms, crustaceans, small fish, fish eggs and larvae, and other jellyfish, ingesting food and voiding undigested waste through the mouth. They hunt passively using their tentacles as drift lines, or sink through the water with their tentacles spread widely; the tentacles, which contain nematocysts to stun or kill the prey, may then flex to help bring it to the mouth.[24] Their swimming technique also helps them to capture prey; when their bell expands it sucks in water which brings more potential prey within reach of the tentacles.[66]

A few species such as Aglaura hemistoma are omnivorous, feeding on microplankton which is a mixture of zooplankton and phytoplankton (microscopic plants) such as dinoflagellates.[67] Others harbour mutualistic algae (Zooxanthellae) in their tissues;[24] the spotted jellyfish (Mastigias papua) is typical of these, deriving part of its nutrition from the products of photosynthesis, and part from captured zooplankton.[68][69]
Predation

Other species of jellyfish are among the most common and important jellyfish predators. Sea anemones may eat jellyfish that drift into their range. Other predators include tunas, sharks, swordfish, sea turtles and penguins.[70][71] Jellyfish washed up on the beach are consumed by foxes, other terrestrial mammals and birds.[72] In general however, few animals prey on jellyfish; they can broadly be considered to be top predators in the food chain. Once jellyfish have become dominant in an ecosystem, for example through overfishing which removes predators of jellyfish larvae, there may be no obvious way for the previous balance to be restored: they eat fish eggs and juvenile fish, and compete with fish for food, preventing fish stocks from recovering.[73]
Symbiosis

Some small fish are immune to the stings of the jellyfish and live among the tentacles, serving as bait in a fish trap; they are safe from potential predators and are able to share the fish caught by the jellyfish.[74] The cannonball jellyfish has a symbiotic relationship with ten different species of fish, and with the longnose spider crab, which lives inside the bell, sharing the jellyfish's food and nibbling its tissues.[75]
Blooms
Main article: Jellyfish bloom
Map of population trends of native and invasive jellyfish.[76]
Circles represent data records; larger circles denote higher certainty of findings.
  Increase (high certainty)
  Increase (low certainty)
  Stable/variable
  Decrease
  No data

Jellyfish form large masses or blooms in certain environmental conditions of ocean currents, nutrients, sunshine, temperature, season, prey availability, reduced predation and oxygen concentration. Currents collect jellyfish together, especially in years with unusually high populations. Jellyfish can detect marine currents and swim against the current to congregate in blooms.[77][78] Jellyfish are better able to survive in nutrient-rich, oxygen-poor water than competitors, and thus can feast on plankton without competition. Jellyfish may also benefit from saltier waters, as saltier waters contain more iodine, which is necessary for polyps to turn into jellyfish. Rising sea temperatures caused by climate change may also contribute to jellyfish blooms, because many species of jellyfish are able to survive in warmer waters.[79] Increased nutrients from agricultural or urban runoff with nutrients including nitrogen and phosphorus compounds increase the growth of phytoplankton, causing eutrophication and algal blooms. When the phytoplankton die, they may create dead zones, so called because they are ahypoxic (low in oxygen). This in turn kills fish and other animals, but not jellyfish,[80] allowing them to bloom.[81][82] Jellyfish populations may be expanding globally as a result of land runoff and overfishing of their natural predators.[83][84] Jellyfish are well placed to benefit from disturbance of marine ecosystems. They reproduce rapidly; they prey upon many species, while few species prey on them; and they feed via touch rather than visually, so they can feed effectively at night and in turbid waters.[85][86] It may be difficult for fish stocks to reestablish themselves in marine ecosystems once they have become dominated by jellyfish, because jellyfish feed on plankton, which includes fish eggs and larvae.[87][88][89][82]
Moon jellyfishes can live in northern hemisphere seas,[90][91] such as the Baltic Sea.[92][93]

Some jellyfish populations that have shown clear increases in the past few decades are invasive species, newly arrived from other habitats: examples include the Black Sea, Caspian Sea, Baltic Sea, central and eastern Mediterranean, Hawaii, and tropical and subtropical parts of the West Atlantic (including the Caribbean, Gulf of Mexico and Brazil).[92][93]

Jellyfish blooms can have significant impact on community structure. Some carnivorous jellyfish species prey on zooplankton while others graze on primary producers.[94] Reductions in zooplankton and icthyplankton due to a jellyfish bloom can ripple through the trophic levels. High density jellyfish populations can out compete other predators and reduce fish recruitment.[95] Increased grazing on primary producers by jellyfish can also interrupt energy transfer to higher trophic levels.[96]

During blooms, jellyfish significantly alter the nutrient availability in their environment. Blooms require large amounts of available organic nutrients in the water column to grow, limiting availability for other organisms.[97] Some jellyfish have a symbiotic relationship with single-celled dinoflagellates, allowing them to assimilate inorganic carbon, phosphorus, and nitrogen creating competition for phytoplankton.[97] Their large biomass makes them an important source of dissolved and particulate organic matter for microbial communities through excretion, mucus production, and decomposition.[98][99] The microbes break down the organic matter into inorganic ammonium and phosphate. However, the low carbon availability shifts the process from production to respiration creating low oxygen areas making the dissolved inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus largely unavailable for primary production.

These blooms have very real impacts on industries. Jellyfish can out compete fish by utilizing open niches in over-fished fisheries.[100] Catch of jellyfish can strain fishing gear and lead to expenses relating to damaged gear. Power plants have been shut down due to jellyfish blocking the flow of cooling water.[101] Blooms have also been harmful for tourism, causing a rise in stings and sometimes the closure of beaches.[102]

Jellyfish form a component of jelly-falls, events where gelatinous zooplankton fall to the seafloor, providing food for the benthic organisms there.[103] In temperate and subpolar regions, jelly-falls usually follow immediately after a bloom.[104]
Habitats
A common Scyphozoan jellyfish seen near beaches in the Florida Panhandle

Most jellyfish are marine animals, although a few hydromedusae inhabit freshwater. The best known freshwater example is the cosmopolitan hydrozoan jellyfish, Craspedacusta sowerbii. It is less than an inch (2.5 cm) in diameter, colorless and does not sting.[105] Some jellyfish populations have become restricted to coastal saltwater lakes, such as Jellyfish Lake in Palau.[106] Jellyfish Lake is a marine lake where millions of golden jellyfish (Mastigias spp.) migrate horizontally across the lake daily.[69]

Although most jellyfish live well off the ocean floor and form part of the plankton, a few species are closely associated with the bottom for much of their lives and can be considered benthic. The upside-down jellyfish in the genus Cassiopea typically lie on the bottom of shallow lagoons where they sometimes pulsate gently with their umbrella top facing down. Even some deep-sea species of hydromedusae and scyphomedusae are usually collected on or near the bottom. All of the stauromedusae are found attached to either seaweed or rocky or other firm material on the bottom.[107]

Some species explicitly adapt to tidal flux. In Roscoe Bay, jellyfish ride the current at ebb tide until they hit a gravel bar, and then descend below the current. They remain in still waters until the tide rises, ascending and allowing it to sweep them back into the bay. They also actively avoid fresh water from mountain snowmelt, diving until they find enough salt.[2]
Parasites

Jellyfish are hosts to a wide variety of parasitic organisms. They act as intermediate hosts of endoparasitic helminths, with the infection being transferred to the definitive host fish after predation. Some digenean trematodes, especially species in the family Lepocreadiidae, use jellyfish as their second intermediate hosts. Fish become infected by the trematodes when they feed on infected jellyfish.[108][109]
Relation to humans
Global harvest of jellyfish in thousands of tonnes as reported by the FAO[110]
Fisheries

Jellyfish have long been eaten in some parts of the world.[3] Fisheries have begun harvesting the American cannonball jellyfish, Stomolophus meleagris, along the southern Atlantic coast of the United States and in the Gulf of Mexico for export to Asia.[111]

Jellyfish are also harvested for their collagen, which is being investigated for use in a variety of applications including the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.[112]
Products
Main article: Jellyfish as food
Rehydrated jellyfish strips with soy sauce and sesame oil

Aristotle stated in the Parts of Animals IV, 6 that jellyfish (sea-nettles) were eaten in winter time in a fish stew.[113]

In some countries, including China, Japan, and Korea, jellyfish are a delicacy. The jellyfish is dried to prevent spoiling. Only some 12 species of scyphozoan jellyfish belonging to the order Rhizostomeae are harvested for food, mostly in southeast Asia.[114] Rhizostomes, especially Rhopilema esculentum in China (海蜇 hǎizhé, 'sea stingers') and Stomolophus meleagris (cannonball jellyfish) in the United States, are favored because of their larger and more rigid bodies and because their toxins are harmless to humans.[111]

Traditional processing methods, carried out by a jellyfish master, involve a 20- to 40-day multi-phase procedure in which, after removing the gonads and mucous membranes, the umbrella and oral arms are treated with a mixture of table salt and alum, and compressed. Processing makes the jellyfish drier and more acidic, producing a crisp texture. Jellyfish prepared this way retain 7–10% of their original weight, and the processed product consists of approximately 94% water and 6% protein. Freshly processed jellyfish has a white, creamy color and turns yellow or brown during prolonged storage.[111]

In China, processed jellyfish are desalted by soaking in water overnight and eaten cooked or raw. The dish is often served shredded with a dressing of oil, soy sauce, vinegar and sugar, or as a salad with vegetables. In Japan, cured jellyfish are rinsed, cut into strips and served with vinegar as an appetizer.[111][115] Desalted, ready-to-eat products are also available.[111]
Biotechnology
The hydromedusa Aequorea victoria was the source of green fluorescent protein, studied for its role in bioluminescence and later for use as a marker in genetic engineering.
Further information: Bioluminescence and Green fluorescent protein

Pliny the Elder reported in his Natural History that the slime of the jellyfish "Pulmo marinus" produced light when rubbed on a walking stick.[116]

In 1961, Osamu Shimomura extracted green fluorescent protein (GFP) and another bioluminescent protein, called aequorin, from the large and abundant hydromedusa Aequorea victoria, while studying photoproteins that cause bioluminescence in this species.[117] Three decades later, Douglas Prasher sequenced and cloned the gene for GFP.[118] Martin Chalfie figured out how to use GFP as a fluorescent marker of genes inserted into other cells or organisms.[119] Roger Tsien later chemically manipulated GFP to produce other fluorescent colors to use as markers. In 2008, Shimomura, Chalfie and Tsien won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their work with GFP.[117] Man-made GFP became widely used as a fluorescent tag to show which cells or tissues express specific genes. The genetic engineering technique fuses the gene of interest to the GFP gene. The fused DNA is then put into a cell, to generate either a cell line or (via IVF techniques) an entire animal bearing the gene. In the cell or animal, the artificial gene turns on in the same tissues and the same time as the normal gene, making GFP instead of the normal protein. Illuminating the animal or cell reveals what tissues express that protein—or at what stage of development. The fluorescence shows where the gene is expressed.[120]
Aquarium display
Photo of downward-swimming jellies
Pacific sea nettles (Chrysaora fuscescens) in an aquarium exhibit

Jellyfish are displayed in many public aquariums. Often the tank's background is blue and the animals are illuminated by side light, increasing the contrast between the animal and the background. In natural conditions, many jellies are so transparent that they are nearly invisible.[121] Jellyfish are not adapted to closed spaces. They depend on currents to transport them from place to place. Professional exhibits as in the Monterey Bay Aquarium feature precise water flows, typically in circular tanks to avoid trapping specimens in corners. They have a live "Jelly Cam".[122] The outflow is spread out over a large surface area and the inflow enters as a sheet of water in front of the outflow, so the jellyfish do not get sucked into it.[123] As of 2009, jellyfish were becoming popular in home aquariums, where they require similar equipment.[124]
Stings
Box jellyfish are small and venomous.

Jellyfish are armed with nematocysts. Contact with a jellyfish tentacle can trigger millions of nematocysts to pierce the skin and inject venom,[125] but only some species' venom causes an adverse reaction in humans.[126] In a study published in Communications Biology, researchers found a jellyfish species called Cassiopea xamachana which when triggered will release tiny balls of cells that swim around the jellyfish stinging everything in their path. Researchers described these as "self-propelling microscopic grenades" and named them cassiosomes.[127]

The effects of stings range from mild discomfort to extreme pain and death.[128][129] Most jellyfish stings are not deadly, but stings of some box jellyfish (Irukandji jellyfish), such as the sea wasp, can be deadly. Stings may cause anaphylaxis (a form of shock), which can be fatal. Jellyfish kill 20 to 40 people a year in the Philippines alone. In 2006 the Spanish Red Cross treated 19,000 stung swimmers along the Costa Brava.[129][130]

Vinegar (3–10% aqueous acetic acid) may help with box jellyfish stings[131][132] but not the stings of the Portuguese man o' war.[131] Salt water may help if vinegar is unavailable.[131][133] Rubbing wounds, or using alcohol, ammonia, fresh water, or urine is not advised, as they can encourage the release of more venom.[134] Clearing the area of jelly and tentacles reduces nematocyst firing.[134] Scraping the affected skin, such as with the edge of a credit card, may remove remaining nematocysts.[135] Once the skin has been cleaned of nematocysts, hydrocortisone cream applied locally reduces pain and inflammation.[136] Antihistamines may help to control itching.[135] Immunobased antivenins are used for serious box jellyfish stings.[137][138]
Mechanical issues

Jellyfish in large quantities can fill and split fishing nets and crush captured fish.[139] They can clog cooling equipment, disabling power stations in several countries; jellyfish caused a cascading blackout in the Philippines in 1999,[129] as well as damaging the Diablo Canyon Power Plant in California in 2008.[140] They can also stop desalination plants and ships' engines.[139][141]
See also

    Jellyfish dermatitis
    List of prehistoric medusozoans
    Ocean sunfish, a significant jellyfish predator

References

Fossil Record Reveals Elusive Jellyfish More Than 500 Million Years Old Archived 7 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine. ScienceDaily (2 November 2007).
Angier, Natalie (June 6, 2011). "So Much More Than Plasma and Poison". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 2 December 2011.
Isabelle Rodd (20 October 2020). "Why jellyfish could be a 'perfect food'". BBC News.
"jellyfish". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 9 June 2018.
Kelman, Janet Harvey; Rev. Theodore Wood (1910). The Sea-Shore, Shown to the Children. London: T. C. & E. C. Jack. p. 146. OL 7043926M.
Kaplan, Eugene H.; Kaplan, Susan L.; Peterson, Roger Tory (August 1999). A Field Guide to Coral Reefs: Caribbean and Florida. Boston : Houghton Mifflin. p. 55. ISBN 978-0-618-00211-5.
Flower Hat Jelly, New York Aquarium.
"What is a Fish?". Encyclopedia of Life. Archived from the original on 24 March 2018. Retrieved 13 October 2018. "And most people know that lampreys, sharks, rays, eels, seahorses, and other strange-looking aquatic creatures are fishes, while shellfish, cuttlefish, starfish, crayfish, and jellyfish (despite their names) are not fishes."
Brotz, Lucas. Changing Jellyfish Populations: Trends in Large Marine Ecosystems Archived 16 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine. 2011. p.1.
Coulombe, Deborah A. (14 February 1990). Seaside Naturalist: A Guide to Study at the Seashore. Simon & Schuster. p. 60. ISBN 9780671765033. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013. Retrieved 20 March 2013.
Klappenbach, Laura. "Ten Facts about Jellyfish". Archived from the original on 26 February 2009. Retrieved 24 January 2010.
Lipton, James (1991). An Exaltation of Larks. Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-30044-0.
Cartwright, Paulyn; Halgedahl, Susan L.; Hendricks, Jonathan R.; Jarrard, Richard D.; Marques, Antonio C.; Collins, Allen G.; Lieberman, Bruce S. (2007). Humphries, Stuart (ed.). "Exceptionally Preserved Jellyfishes from the Middle Cambrian". PLOS ONE. 2 (10): e1121. Bibcode:2007PLoSO...2.1121C. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001121. PMC 2040521. PMID 17971881.
"Jellyfish". Merriam-Webster. 1 September 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2018.
"Jellyfish Spotting | Species of Jellyfish". Policy-oriented marine Environmental Research in the Southern European Seas (PERSEUS). Retrieved 28 August 2018.
Mills, C. E. (8 November 2010). "Ctenophores". University of Washington. Retrieved 28 August 2018.
"Our jelly-like relatives: Common misconceptions about salps". Nereus Program. Retrieved 28 August 2018.
Zapata, Felipe; Goetz, Freya E.; Smith, Stephen A.; Howison, Mark; Siebert, Stefan; Church, Samuel H.; Sanders, Steven M.; Ames, Cheryl Lewis; McFadden, Catherine S.; France, Scott C.; Daly, Marymegan; Collins, Allen G.; Haddock, Steven H. D.; Dunn, Casey W.; Cartwright, Paulyn (2015). "Phylogenomic Analyses Support Traditional Relationships within Cnidaria". PLOS ONE. 10 (10): e0139068. Bibcode:2015PLoSO..1039068Z. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0139068. PMC 4605497. PMID 26465609.
Kayal, Ehsan; Bentlage, Bastian; Sabrina Pankey, M.; Ohdera, Aki H.; Medina, Monica; Plachetzki, David C.; Collins, Allen G.; Ryan, Joseph F. (2018). "Phylogenomics provides a robust topology of the major cnidarian lineages and insights on the origins of key organismal traits". BMC Evolutionary Biology. 18: 68. doi:10.1186/s12862-018-1142-0. PMC 5932825.
"STAUROMEDUSAE UK An online guide to the Stalked jellyfish (Stauromedusae) found around the coastal waters of the United Kingdom and Ireland. Includes notes on their identification, and where and how to find them. BACK UK Checklist for Stalked jellyfish (Stauromedusae)". Stauromedusae UK. Retrieved 28 August 2018.
Schierwater, Bernd; Helm, Rebecca R.; Dunn, Casey W. (2017). "Indoles induce metamorphosis in a broad diversity of jellyfish, but not in a crown jelly (Coronatae)". PLOS ONE. 12 (12): e0188601. Bibcode:2017PLoSO..1288601H. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0188601. PMC 5744923. PMID 29281657.
Osborn, K. J. (2014). "Red Paper Lantern Jellyfish". Smithsonian. Retrieved 13 October 2018.
Daley, Jason (1 March 2017). "Take a Peek at the Mesmerizing 'Cosmic Jellyfish'". Smithsonian. Retrieved 28 August 2018.
Ruppert, Edward E.; Fox, Richard, S.; Barnes, Robert D. (2004). Invertebrate Zoology, 7th edition. Cengage Learning. pp. 148–174. ISBN 978-81-315-0104-7.
Cnidaria Archived 2012-09-21 at the Wayback Machine, Tree of Life.
Marques, A.C.; A. G. Collins (2004). "Cladistic analysis of Medusozoa and cnidarian evolution". Invertebrate Biology. 123: 23–42. doi:10.1111/j.1744-7410.2004.tb00139.x. S2CID 28342963.
Kramp, P.L. (1961). "Synopsis of the Medusae of the World". Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom. 40: 1–469. doi:10.1017/s0025315400007347.
Van Iten, Heyo; Marques, Antonio C.; Leme, Juliana de Moraes; Pacheco, Mirian L. A. Forancelli; Simões, Marcello Guimaraes (2014). Smith, Andrew (ed.). "Origin and early diversification of the phylum Cnidaria Verrill: major developments in the analysis of the taxon's Proterozoic-Cambrian history". Palaeontology. 57 (4): 677–690. doi:10.1111/pala.12116.
Hsieh, Yun-Hwa; Rudloe, Jack (1994). "Potential of utilizing jellyfish as food in Western countries". Trends in Food Science & Technology. 5 (7): 225–229. doi:10.1016/0924-2244(94)90253-4.
Jellyfish Archived 21 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine, The Visual Dictionary. Retrieved 28 March 2015
Waggoner, Ben; Collins, Allen G. "Cubozoa: More on Morphology". University of California Museum of Paleontology. Retrieved 6 January 2019.
"Nematocysts". Jellieszone. 2 April 2015. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Kier, William (2012). "The diversity of hydrostatic skeletons". Journal of Experimental Biology. 215 (Pt 8): 1247–1257. doi:10.1242/jeb.056549. PMID 22442361.
Satterlie, R. A. (2002). "Neuronal control of swimming in jellyfish: a comparative story". Canadian Journal of Zoology. 80 (10): 1654–1669. doi:10.1139/z02-138. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2013.
Katsuki, Takeo; Greenspan, Ralph J. (2013). "Jellyfish nervous systems". Current Biology. 23 (14): R592–R594. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.03.057. PMID 23885868.
Satterlie, Richard A. (2011). "Do jellyfish have central nervous systems?". Journal of Experimental Biology. 214 (8): 1215–1223. doi:10.1242/jeb.043687. PMID 21430196.
Wehner, R. (2005). "Sensory physiology: brainless eyes" (PDF). Nature. 435 (7039): 157–159. Bibcode:2005Natur.435..157W. doi:10.1038/435157a. PMID 15889076. S2CID 4408533. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 July 2013.
Multi-eyed jellyfish helps with Darwin's puzzle. Newscientist.com (14 May 2005). Retrieved on 10 January 2013. Archived 12 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine (subscription required)
Mills, C.E.; Hirano, Y.M. (2007). Encyclopedia of Tidepools and Rocky Shores: Hydromedusae. University of California Press. pp. 286–288. ISBN 978-0520251182.
Mills, C.E. (1976). "Podocoryne selena, a new species of hydroid from the Gulf of Mexico, and a comparison with Hydractinia echinata". Biological Bulletin. 151 (1): 214–224. doi:10.2307/1540715. JSTOR 1540715.
Costello, J. (1988). "Laboratory culture and feeding of the hydromedusa Cladonema californicum Hyman (Anthomedusa: Cladonemidae)". Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology. 123 (2): 177–188. doi:10.1016/0022-0981(88)90168-2.
"Rare sighting of a lion's mane jellyfish in Tramore Bay". Waterford Today. 1 August 2007. Archived from the original on 2010-05-30. Retrieved 18 October 2010.
"Lion's Mane Jellyfish – Reference Library". redOrbit. 2003-06-12. Archived from the original on 30 July 2010. Retrieved 18 October 2010.
"150 Stung By Jellyfish At Rye Beach". Wmur.com. 21 July 2010. Archived from the original on 14 October 2011. Retrieved 11 June 2018.
Omori, Makoto; Kitamura, Minoru (2004). "Taxonomic review of three Japanese species of edible jellyfish (Scyphozoa: Rhizostomeae)" (PDF). Plankton Biology and Ecology. 51 (1): 36–51. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 March 2012.
Uye, Shin-Ichi (2008). "Blooms of the giant jellyfish Nemopilema nomurai: a threat to the fisheries sustainability of the East Asian Marginal Seas" (PDF). Plankton & Benthos Research. 3 (Supplement): 125–131. doi:10.3800/pbr.3.125. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 May 2013.
"Giant Echizen jellyfish off Japan coast". BBC. 30 November 2009. Archived from the original on 1 January 2011.
Kramp, P.L. (1961). "Synopsis of the medusae of the world". Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom. 40: 1–469. doi:10.1017/s0025315400007347.
Bourton, Jody (23 April 2010). "Giant deep sea jellyfish filmed in Gulf of Mexico". BBC Earth News. Archived from the original on 5 July 2010.
"How do jellyfish reproduce? What effect does their sting have on humans? What's the difference between red and translucent jellyfish?". Scientific American. 15 October 2013. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 22 October 2013.
Mills, Claudia (1983). "Vertical migration and diel activity patterns of hydromedusae: studies in a large tank". Journal of Plankton Research. 5 (5): 619–635. doi:10.1093/plankt/5.5.619. S2CID 13914997.
Bishop, Andrew. "Moon Jelly (Aurelia aurita)". Marine Invertebrates of Bermuda. Retrieved 11 June 2018.
Mills, C. E. (1987). J. Bouillon; F. Boero; F. Cicogna; P. F. S. Cornelius (eds.). In situ and shipboard studies of living hydromedusae and hydroids: preliminary observations of life-cycle adaptations to the open ocean. Modern Trends in the Systematics, Ecology, and Evolution of Hydroids and Hydromedusae. Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0198571902.
Fewkes, J. Walter (1887). "A hydroid parasitic on a fish". Nature. 36 (939): 604–605. Bibcode:1887Natur..36..604F. doi:10.1038/036604b0. S2CID 4078889.
Schuchert, Peter. "The Hydrozoa". Archived from the original on 4 February 2010. Retrieved 24 January 2010.
Jellyfish – The Life Cycle of a Jellyfish ThoughtCo. Archived 8 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine Animals.about.com. Retrieved on 10 January 2013
Hughes, Clare. "Lifecycle of the Box Jellyfish". Artforlibraries.org. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 2 January 2016.
Brusca, Richard (2016). Invertebrates. Sinauer Associates. p. 310. ISBN 978-1-60535-375-3.
Miglietta, M. P.; Piraino, S.; Kubota, S.; Schuchert, P. (2007). "Species in the genus Turritopsis (Cnidaria, Hydrozoa): a molecular evaluation". Journal of Zoological Systematics and Evolutionary Research. 45 (1): 11–19. doi:10.1111/j.1439-0469.2006.00379.x.
Piraino, S.; Boero, F.; Aeschbach, B.; Schmid, V. (1996). "Reversing the life cycle: medusae transforming into polyps and cell transdifferentiation in Turritopsis nutricula (Cnidaria, Hydrozoa)". Biological Bulletin. 190 (3): 302–312. doi:10.2307/1543022. JSTOR 1543022. PMID 29227703. S2CID 3956265.
Rathi, Akshat (15 May 2014). "Jellyfish are the most energy-efficient swimmers, new metric confirms". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014.
Gemmell, Brad J.; Costello, John H.; Colin, Sean P.; Stewart, Colin J.; Dabiri, John O.; Tafti, Danesh; Priya, Shashank (2013). "Jellyfish energy efficiency to improve bio-inspired robotic designs for Navy". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 110 (44): 17904–9. Bibcode:2013PNAS..11017904G. doi:10.1073/pnas.1306983110. PMC 3816424. PMID 24101461. Archived from the original on 22 October 2013.
Gemmell, B. J.; Costello, J. H.; Colin, S. P.; Stewart, C. J.; Dabiri, J. O.; Tafti, D.; Priya, S. (2013). "Passive energy recapture in jellyfish contributes to propulsive advantage over other metazoans". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 110 (44): 17904–17909. Bibcode:2013PNAS..11017904G. doi:10.1073/pnas.1306983110. PMC 3816424. PMID 24101461.
Yong, Ed (2013). "Why a jellyfish is the ocean's most efficient swimmer". Nature. doi:10.1038/nature.2013.13895. S2CID 130651916. Archived from the original on 11 December 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014.
Brusca, Richard (2016). Invertebrates. Sinauer Associates. p. 296. ISBN 978-1-60535-375-3. "All cnidarians are carnivores (or parasites). Typically, nematocyst-laden feeding tentacles capture animal prey and carry it to the mouth region where it is ingested whole."
"Bigger jellyfish inheriting the ocean, study finds". msnbc.com. 2011-09-15. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014.
Davies, C.H.; Slotwinski, A.S. "Australian Marine Zooplankton-Jellyfish, Cladocerans" (PDF). Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania. Retrieved 12 October 2018.
Dawson, Michael N. (2000). "Variegated mesocosms as alternatives to shore-based planktonkreisels: notes on the husbandry of jellyfish from marine lakes". Journal of Plankton Research. 22 (9): 1673–1682. doi:10.1093/plankt/22.9.1673.
Dawson, Mike N.; Martin, Laura E.; Lolita K, Lolita K.; Penland (May 2001). Jellyfish swarms, tourists, and the Christ-child. Hydrobiologia. 451. Springer. pp. 131–144. doi:10.1023/A:1011868925383. ISBN 978-0-7923-6964-6. S2CID 1679552.
Yin, Steph (September 29, 2017). "Who's Eating Jellyfish? Penguins, That's Who". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
Thiebot, Jean-Baptiste; Arnould, John P. Y.; Gómez-Laich, Agustina; Ito, Kentaro; Kato, Akiko; Mattern, Thomas; Mitamura, Hiromichi; Noda, Takuji; Poupart, Timothée; Quintana, Flavio; Raclot, Thierry; Ropert-Coudert, Yan; Sala, Juan E; Seddon, Philip J.; Sutton, Grace J.; Yoda, Ken; Takahashi, Akinori (2017). "Jellyfish and other gelata as food for four penguin species – insights from predator-borne videos". Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 15 (8): 437–441. doi:10.1002/fee.1529. S2CID 90152409.
Gershwin, Lisa-Ann (2016). Jellyfish: A Natural History. University of Chicago Press. p. 140. ISBN 978-0-226-28767-6.
Gershwin, Lisa-Ann (2013). Stung!: On Jellyfish Blooms and the Future of the Ocean. University of Chicago Press. pp. 274–. ISBN 978-0-226-02010-5. Archived from the original on 6 August 2016.
colugo7 (2006). "The jellyfish". Tree of Life Web Project. Retrieved 7 June 2018.
Griffin, DuBose B.; Murphy, Thomas M. "Cannonball Jellyfish" (PDF). South Carolina Department of Natural Resources. Retrieved 7 June 2018.
Brotz, Lucas; Cheung, William W. L.; Kleisner, Kristin; Pakhomov, Evgeny; Pauly, Daniel (2012). "Increasing jellyfish populations: trends in Large Marine Ecosystems". Hydrobiologia. 688: 3–20. doi:10.1007/s10750-012-1039-7.
Gill, Victoria. "Jellyfish 'can sense ocean currents'". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 January 2015. Retrieved 26 January 2015.
Hays, Graeme C. (2017). "Ocean currents and marine life". Current Biology. 27 (11): R470–R473. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2017.01.044. PMID 28586681.
Shubin, Kristie (10 December 2008). "Anthropogenic Factors Associated with Jellyfish Blooms – Final Draft II". Tropical Field Courses: Western Program: Miami University. Archived from the original on 14 June 2010. Retrieved 19 November 2009.
"What is a dead zone?". National Ocean Service. Retrieved 3 October 2018.
Yong, Ed (6 June 2011). "Jellyfish shift ocean food webs by feeding bacteria with mucus and excrement". Discover Magazine. Retrieved 3 October 2018.
The Washington Post, republished in the European Cetacean Bycatch Campaign, Jellyfish "blooms" could be sign of ailing seas Archived 19 October 2006 at the Wayback Machine, 6 May 2002. Retrieved 25 November 2007.
Hays, G. C.; Bastian, T.; Doyle, T. K.; Fossette, S.; Gleiss, A. C.; Gravenor, M. B.; Hobson, V. J.; Humphries, N. E.; Lilley, M. K. S.; Pade, N. G.; Sims, D. W. (2011). "High activity and Lévy searches: jellyfish can search the water column like fish" (PDF). Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 279 (1728): 465–473. doi:10.1098/rspb.2011.0978. PMC 3234559. PMID 21752825. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 December 2012.
Pauly, D.; Christensen, V.; Dalsgaard, J.; Froese, R.; Torres Jr, F. (1998). "Fishing down marine food webs" (PDF). Science. 279 (5352): 860–863. Bibcode:1998Sci...279..860P. doi:10.1126/science.279.5352.860. PMID 9452385. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 July 2012.
Richardson, A. J.; Bakun, A.; Hays, G. C.; Gibbons, M. J. (2009). "The jellyfish joyride: causes, consequences and management responses to a more gelatinous future" (PDF). Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 24 (6): 312–322. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2009.01.010. PMID 19324452.
Aksnes, D. L.; Nejstgaard, J.; Sædberg, E.; Sørnes, T. (2004). "Optical control of fish and zooplankton populations" (PDF). Limnology and Oceanography. 49 (1): 233–238. Bibcode:2004LimOc..49..233A. doi:10.4319/lo.2004.49.1.0233. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-07-12. Retrieved 2011-12-03.
Lynam, C. P.; Gibbons, M. J.; Axelsen, B. E.; Sparks, C. A. J.; Coetzee, J.; Heywood, B. G.; Brierley, A. S. (2006). "Jellyfish overtake fish in a heavily fished ecosystem" (PDF). Current Biology. 16 (13): 492–493. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.018. PMID 16824906. S2CID 62793057. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 March 2011.
Pauly, D.; Graham, W.; Libralato, S.; Morissette, L.; Palomares, M. L. D. (2009). "Jellyfish in ecosystems, online databases, and ecosystem models". Hydrobiologia. 616: 67–85. doi:10.1007/s10750-008-9583-x. S2CID 12415790. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2013.
Mills, C. E. (2001). "Jellyfish blooms: are populations increasing globally in response to changing ocean conditions?" (PDF). Hydrobiologia. 451: 55–68. doi:10.1023/A:1011888006302. S2CID 10927442. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 March 2016.
Dawson, M. N.; Sen Gupta, A.; England, M. H. (2005). "Coupled biophysical global ocean model and molecular genetic analyses identify multiple introductions of cryptogenic species". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 102 (34): 11968–73. doi:10.1073/pnas.0503811102. PMC 1189321. PMID 16103373.
Dawson, M. N. (2003). "Macro-morphological variation among cryptic species of the moon jellyfish, Aurelia (Cnidaria: Scyphozoa)". Marine Biology. 143 (2): 369–79. doi:10.1007/s00227-003-1070-3. S2CID 189820003.
Abed-Navandi, D.; Kikinger, R. (2007). "First record of the tropical scyphomedusa Phyllorhiza punctata von Lendenfeld, 1884 (Cnidaria: Rhizostomeae) in the Central Mediterranean Sea" (PDF). Aquatic Invasions. 2 (4): 391–394. doi:10.3391/ai.2007.2.4.7. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 September 2012.
Rinat, Zafrir (15 June 2009). "World's Most Invasive Jellyfish Spreading Along Israel Coast". Haaretz. Retrieved 13 October 2018.
Purcell, J.; Arai, M. (2001). Purcell, J. E; Graham, W. M; Dumont, H. J (eds.). "Interactions of pelagic cnidarians and ctenophores with fish: a review". Hydrobiologia. 541: 27–44. doi:10.1007/978-94-010-0722-1. ISBN 978-94-010-3835-5. S2CID 27615539.
Brodeur, Richard D.; Link, Jason S.; Smith, B. E.; Ford, M. D.; Kobayashi, D. R.; Jones, T. T. (2016). "Ecological and Economic Consequences of Ignoring Jellyfish: A Plea for Increased Monitoring of Ecosystems". Fisheries. 41 (11): 630–637. doi:10.1080/03632415.2016.1232964.
Ruzicka, J.J.; Brodeur, R.D.; Emmett, R.L.; Steele, J.H.; Zamon, J.E.; Morgan, C.A.; Thomas, A.C.; Wainwright, T.C. (2012). "Interannual variability in the Northern California Current food web structure: changes in energy flow pathways and the role of forage fish, euphausiids, and jellyfish". Progress in Oceanography. 102: 19–41. Bibcode:2012PrOce.102...19R. doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2012.02.002.
Pitt, Kylie; Welsh, David; Condon, Robert (January 2009). "Influence of jellyfish blooms on carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus cycling and plankton production". Hydrobiologia. 616: 133–149. doi:10.1007/s10750-008-9584-9. S2CID 22838905.
Brotz, Lucas; Cheung, William W. L.; Kleisner, Kristin; Pakhomov, Evgeny; Pauly, Daniel (2012), Purcell, Jennifer; Mianzan, Hermes; Frost, Jesscia R. (eds.), "Increasing jellyfish populations: trends in Large Marine Ecosystems", Jellyfish Blooms IV: Interactions with humans and fisheries, Developments in Hydrobiology, Springer Netherlands, pp. 3–20, doi:10.1007/978-94-007-5316-7_2, ISBN 9789400753167
Condon, Robert H.; Duarte, Carlos M.; Pitt, Kylie A.; Robinson, Kelly L.; Lucas, Cathy H.; Sutherland, Kelly R.; Mianzan, Hermes W.; Bogeberg, Molly; Purcell, Jennifer E.; Decker, Mary Beth; Uye, Shin-ichi (2013-01-15). "Recurrent jellyfish blooms are a consequence of global oscillations". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 110 (3): 1000–1005. Bibcode:2013PNAS..110.1000C. doi:10.1073/pnas.1210920110. PMC 3549082. PMID 23277544.
Lynam, Christopher P.; Gibbons, Mark J.; Axelsen, Bjørn E.; Sparks, Conrad A. J.; Coetzee, Janet; Heywood, Benjamin G.; Brierley, Andrew S. (2006-07-11). "Jellyfish overtake fish in a heavily fished ecosystem". Current Biology. 16 (13): R492–493. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.018. PMID 16824906. S2CID 62793057.
Masilamani, J; Jesudoss, K; Kanavillil, Nandakumar; Satpathy, K.K.; Nair, K; Azariah, J (2000-09-10). "Jellyfish ingress: A threat to the smooth operation of coastal power plants". Current Science. 79: 567–569.
Purcell, Jennifer E.; Uye, Shin-ichi; Lo, Wen-Tseng (2007-11-22). "Anthropogenic causes of jellyfish blooms and their direct consequences for humans: a review". Marine Ecology Progress Series. 350: 153–174. Bibcode:2007MEPS..350..153P. doi:10.3354/meps07093.
Sweetman, Andrew K.; Smith, Craig R.; Dale, Trine; Jones, Daniel O. B. (2014). "Rapid scavenging of jellyfish carcasses reveals the importance of gelatinous material to deep-sea food webs". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 281 (1796): 20142210. doi:10.1098/rspb.2014.2210. PMC 4213659. PMID 25320167.
Lebrato, Mario; Pahlow, Markus; Oschlies, Andreas; Pitt, Kylie A.; Jones, Daniel O. B.; Molinero, Juan Carlos & Condon, Robert H. (2011). "Depth attenuation of organic matter export associated with jelly falls" (PDF). Limnology and Oceanography. 56 (5): 1917–1928. Bibcode:2011LimOc..56.1917L. doi:10.4319/lo.2011.56.5.1917. hdl:10072/43275.
Didžiulis, Viktoras. "Invasive Alien Species Fact Sheet: Craspedacusta sowerbyi" (PDF). NOBANIS. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2016.
Dawson, Mike N.; Martin, Laura E.; Penland, Lolita K. (2001). Jellyfish swarms, tourists, and the Christ-child. Hydrobiologia. 451. pp. 131–144. doi:10.1023/A:1011868925383. ISBN 978-0-7923-6964-6. S2CID 1679552.
Mills, C. E.; Hirano, Y. M. (2007). "Stauromedusae". Encyclopedia of Tidepools and Rocky Shores: 541–543.
Kondo, Yusuke; Ohtsuka, Susumu; Hirabayashi, Takeshi; Okada, Shoma; Ogawa, Nanako O.; Ohkouchi, Naohiko; Shimazu, Takeshi; Nishikawa, Jun (2016). "Seasonal changes in infection with trematode species utilizing jellyfish as hosts: evidence of transmission to definitive host fish via medusivory". Parasite. 23: 16. doi:10.1051/parasite/2016016. PMC 4824873. PMID 27055563. Archived from the original on 4 November 2017.
Leung, Tommy (26 May 2016). "Opechona olssoni". Blog: Parasite of the Day. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 1 June 2016.
Based on data extracted from the FishStat database Archived 7 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine
Hsieh, Y-H. Peggy; Leong, Fui-Ming; Rudloe, Jack (2001). "Jellyfish as food". Hydrobiologia. 451 (1–3): 11–17. doi:10.1023/A:1011875720415. S2CID 20719121.
George, Aleta (1 November 2012). "Jellies in the Spotlight". Endocrine News. Endocrine Society. Retrieved 16 June 2018.
Aristotle; William Ogle (trans.) (2018). Parts of Animals. IV. p. 6. ISBN 9782378989842.
Omori, M.; Nakano, E. (2001). "Jellyfish fisheries in southeast Asia". Hydrobiologia. 451: 19–26. doi:10.1023/A:1011879821323. S2CID 6518460.
Firth, F. E. (1969). The Encyclopedia of Marine Resources. Van Nostrand Reinhold. ISBN 978-0-442-22399-1.
"How the Jelly Got Its Glow". American Museum of Natural History. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 11 June 2018.
Shimomura, O.; Johnson, F. H.; Saiga, Y. (1962). "Extraction, purification and properties of aequorin, a bioluminescent protein from the luminous hydromedusan, Aequorea". Journal of Cellular and Comparative Physiology. 59 (3): 223–39. doi:10.1002/jcp.1030590302. PMID 13911999.
Prasher, D. C.; Eckenrode, V. K.; Ward, W. W.; Prendergast, F. G.; Cormier, M. J. (1992). "Primary structure of the Aequorea victoria green-fluorescent protein". Gene. 111 (2): 229–33. doi:10.1016/0378-1119(92)90691-H. PMID 1347277.
Chalfie, M.; Tu, Y.; Euskirchen, G.; Ward, W. W.; Prasher, D. C. (Feb 1994). "Green fluorescent protein as a marker for gene expression". Science. 263 (5148): 802–5. Bibcode:1994Sci...263..802C. doi:10.1126/science.8303295. PMID 8303295. S2CID 9043327.
Pieribone, V.; Gruber, D. F. (2006). Aglow in the Dark: The Revolutionary Science of Biofluorescence. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0674024137.
Herring, Peter (2002). The Biology of the Deep Ocean Oxford University Press. pp. 190–191. ISBN 978-0-19-854956-7.
"Jelly Cam". Monterey Bay Aquarium. Retrieved 13 October 2018.
"US Patent for Jellyfish Tank". Archived from the original on 20 February 2015.
Richtel, Matt (14 March 2009). "How to Avoid Liquefying Your Jellyfish". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 26 March 2010. Retrieved 6 May 2010.
Purves, W.K.; Sadava, D.; Orians, G.H.; Heller, H.C. 1998. Life. The Science of Biology. Part 4: The Evolution of Diversity. Chapter 31
"Jellyfish Tanks and live pet Jellyfish for sale at Jellyfish Art – Buy Jellyfish and Jellyfish tanks". jellyfishart.com. Archived from the original on 2 March 2012. Retrieved 3 December 2014.
Giaimo, Cara (2020-02-13). "You Didn't Touch These Jellyfish, but They Can Sting You With Tiny Grenades". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2020-02-27.
Mahon, Andrew; Mallinson, Tom E (2020). "Lion's mane jellyfish sting". International Paramedic Practice. 10 (2): 46–48. doi:10.12968/ippr.2020.10.2.46. ISSN 2052-4889.
Tucker, Abigail (July 2010). "The New King of the Sea". Smithsonian. 54 (4): 540–561. doi:10.1177/1363461517722869. PMID 28752797. S2CID 12532183.
Adams, Julie (13 August 2016). "Box Jellyfish: Why are they so deadly?". Our Beautiful Planet. Archived from the original on 10 September 2016. Retrieved 17 September 2016.
Fenner, P.; Williamson, J.; Burnett, J.; Rifkin, J. (1993). "First aid treatment of jellyfish stings in Australia. Response to a newly differentiated species". Medical Journal of Australia. 158 (7): 498–501. doi:10.5694/j.1326-5377.1993.tb137588.x. PMID 8469205. S2CID 42453046.
Currie, B.; Ho, S.; Alderslade, P. (1993). "Box-jellyfish, Coca-Cola and old wine". Medical Journal of Australia. 158 (12): 868. doi:10.5694/j.1326-5377.1993.tb137688.x. PMID 8100984. S2CID 19857333.
Yoshimoto, C.; Leong, Fui-Ming; Rudloe, Jack (2006). "Jellyfish species distinction has treatment implications". American Family Physician. 73 (3): 391. PMID 16477882.
Hartwick, R.; Callanan, V.; Williamson, J. (1980). "Disarming the box-jellyfish: nematocyst inhibition in Chironex fleckeri". Medical Journal of Australia. 1 (1): 15–20. doi:10.5694/j.1326-5377.1980.tb134566.x. PMID 6102347. S2CID 204054168.
Perkins, R.; Morgan, S. (2004). "Poisoning, envenomation, and trauma from marine creatures". American Family Physician. 69 (4): 885–90. PMID 14989575.
Simmons, Brian J.; Griffith, Robert D.; Falto-Aizpurua, Leyre A.; Nouri, Keyvan (2015). "Moon Jellyfish Stings". JAMA Dermatology. 151 (4): 454–6. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2014.4644. PMID 25517656.
Baxter, E. H.; Marr, A. G. M. (May 1974). "Sea wasp (Chironex fleckeri) antivenene: Neutralizing potency against the venom of three other jellyfish species". Toxicon. 12 (3): 223–225. doi:10.1016/0041-0101(74)90062-2. PMID 4156430.
"Jellyfish Stings: Treatment and Drugs". Mayo Clinic. Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. 1 September 2011. Archived from the original on 20 May 2013. Retrieved 15 April 2013.
"Jellyfish Gone Wild — Text-only". Nsf.gov. Archived from the original on 12 July 2010. Retrieved 18 October 2010.
"Current Event Notification Report". NRC. 22 October 2008. Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. Retrieved 14 July 2010.

Jellyﬁsh in ecosystems, online databases, and ecosystem
models
Daniel Pauly Æ William Graham Æ
Simone Libralato Æ Lyne Morissette Æ
M. L. Deng Palomares
Published online: 26 September 2008
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract There are indications that pelagic cnidar-
ians and ctenophores (‘jellyﬁsh’) have increased in
abundance throughout the world, or that outbreaks
are more frequent, although much uncertainty sur-
rounds the issue, due to the scarcity of reliable
baseline data. Numerous hypotheses have been
proposed for the individual increases or outbreaks
that are better documented, but direct experimental or
manipulative studies at the ecosystem scale cannot be
used for testing them. Thus, ecological modeling
provides the best alternative to understand the role of
jellyﬁsh in large ﬁsheries-based ecosystems; indeed,
it is an approach consistent with new ecosystem-
based ﬁsheries management practices. Here, we
provide an overview of online databases available
to ecosystem modelers and discuss general aspects
and shortcomings of the coverage of jellyﬁsh in these
databases. We then provide a summary of how
jellyﬁsh have been treated and parameterized by
existing ecosystem models (speciﬁcally focusing on
‘Ecopath with Ecosim’ as a standard modeling
toolset). Despite overall weaknesses in the parame-
terization of jellyﬁsh in these models, interesting
patterns emerge that suggest some systems, espe-
cially smaller and more structured ones, may be
particularly vulnerable to long-term jellyﬁsh biomass
increase. Since jellyﬁsh also feed on the eggs and
larvae of commercially important food ﬁsh, outbreaks
of jellyﬁsh may ultimately imply a reduction in the
ﬁsh biomass available to ﬁsheries. On the other hand,
jellyﬁsh, which have been traditionally ﬁshed for
human consumption in East and Southeast Asia, are
now seen as a potential resource in other parts of the
world, where pilot ﬁsheries have emerged. It is also
argued here that reduced predation on the benthic and
pelagic stages of jellyﬁsh, both a result of ﬁshing,
may be a strong contributing factor as well. For
marine biologists specializing on jellyﬁsh, this means
that their research might become more applied. This
Guest editors: K. A. Pitt & J. E. Purcell
Jellyﬁsh Blooms: Causes, Consequences, and Recent Advances
D. Pauly (&)  M. L. Deng Palomares
Sea Around Us Project, Fisheries Centre,
University of British Columbia, 2202 Main Mall,
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z4
e-mail: d.pauly@ﬁsheries.ubc.ca
M. L. Deng Palomares
e-mail: m.palomares@ﬁsheries.ubc.ca
W. Graham
Dauphin Island Sea Lab and University of South
Alabama, 101 Bienville Blvd., Dauphin Island,
AL 36528, USA
e-mail: mgraham@disl.org
S. Libralato
Istituto Nazionale di Oceanograﬁa e di Geoﬁsica
Sperimentale—OGS, Borgo Grotta Gigante 42/c,
Sgonico, Trieste 34010, Italy
e-mail: slibralato@ogs.trieste.it
L. Morissette
Institut des Sciences de la Mer de Rimouski, 310, Alle
´
e
des Ursulines C.P. 3300, Rimouski, QC, Canada G5L 3A1
123
Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85
DOI 10.1007/s10750-008-9583-x
implies that they would beneﬁt from adopting some
concepts and methods from ﬁsheries biology and
ecosystem modeling, and thus from using (and
contributing to) online databases, such as SeaLife-
Base and FishBase, developed to support such
research. This would remedy the situation, docu-
mented here, wherein jellyﬁsh are either infrequently
included in food web models, typically constructed
using the Ecopath with Ecosim software, or included
as a single functional group with the characteristic of
an ‘average’ jellyﬁsh. Thus, jellyﬁsh specialists could
readily improve the jellyﬁsh-related components of
such models, and we show how they could do this.
Also, it is suggested that when such improvement is
performed, the resulting models can lead to non-
intuitive inferences and hence interesting hypotheses
on the roles of jellyﬁsh in ecosystems. This is
illustrated here through (a) an investigation of
whether jellyﬁsh are keystone species and (b) the
identiﬁcation of conditions under which (simulated)
jellyﬁsh outbreaks may occur.
Keywords Ecopath with Ecosim 
FishBase  SeaLifeBase  Keystone species 
Fishing down marine food webs  Jellyﬁsh outbreaks
Introduction
There are a number of examples of what appear to be
recent (i.e., past few decades) increases, if not only
longer-term climate-driven cycles, of jellyﬁsh popu-
lations (reviewed by Mills, 2001; Graham, 2001;
Brodeur et al., 2002; Purcell, 2005; Kawahara et al.,
2006; Purcell et al., 2007). Since the majority of the
world’s oceans are under some level of ﬁshing
pressure (Pauly et al., 1998a, b; 2002), it is reason-
able to say that jellyﬁsh predators, at a minimum,
contribute additionally through predation on eggs and
larvae of ﬁshes to a multitude of human-induced
pressures (Halpern et al., 2008). It only makes sense,
therefore, that ﬁsheries, by either contributing
directly to increased jellyﬁsh populations or by being
impacted by jellyﬁsh (or both), should incorporate
jellyﬁsh populations into newly emerging ecosystem-
based ﬁsheries management schemes (Ruckelshaus
et al., 2008).
Historically, the relationship between jellyﬁsh
scientists and ﬁsheries scientists has been obscured.
We may attribute this to differences between applied
and basic science approaches, and thus where our
respective work is ultimately published. It is likely,
though, a difference in scientiﬁc language, tools, and
data requirements contributes as much as simply not
reading each other’s publications. Therefore, it is of
greatest priority that ﬁsheries scientists understand
the truly special nature of arguably the most impor-
tant predators of the sea, the jellyﬁsh, and that
jellyﬁsh scientists understand what tools are being
used in ﬁsheries research and, consequently, how best
to supply good data to, and/or collaborate with,
ﬁsheries scientists.
In this contribution, we highlight established
toolsets currently in use by ﬁsheries sciences to
describe the functioning of the ecosystems upon
which ﬁsheries are based, notably the modeling
architecture of Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE;
www.ecopath.org). More precisely, the three spe-
ciﬁc aims of this contribution are:
The ﬁrst is to review the coverage of jellyﬁshes in
two online databases, FishBase and SeaLifeBase. We
also seek to review and examine the role of jellyﬁsh
in published trophic models of ecosystems, con-
structed using the ‘EwE’ software and, in part at
least, parameterized with the aid of these databases.
We pay special attention to important parameteriza-
tion features of EwE so that future modeling efforts
may correctly incorporate jellyﬁsh.
Our second aim is to provide examples of the kind
of hypotheses concerning the ecological role of
jellyﬁsh that can be tested using such trophic models.
This concerns hypotheses based on the structure
(relative biomasses, food web linkages, etc.) of such
(Ecopath) models, as well as hypotheses resulting
from an examination of their population dynamics (as
run by Ecosim).
Our third aim, ﬁnally, is to reframe these hypoth-
eses, all eminently testable, around the ubiquitously
observed pattern of ‘ﬁshing down marine food webs’
(Pauly et al., 1998a, b), to explain why jellyﬁsh
outbreaks, worldwide, should occur more frequently
than hitherto—notwithstanding the fact that the
compelling evidence that they do is dubious, owing
to the nature of available datasets (Purcell, 2005). We
then conclude by outlining what we believe would be
fruitful avenues for further research.
68 Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85
123
Jellyﬁsh in FishBase
FishBase (www.ﬁshbase.org) is an online database of
ﬁsh, containing information about all ([30,000) ﬁsh
species described so far. It provides information on
nomenclature and taxonomy, as well as quantitative
and qualitative information on biological and eco-
logical aspects of ﬁsh (e.g., distribution, food and
feeding, growth, and reproduction, all of which can
be combined to yield new insights), extracted from
the scientiﬁc literature and fully referenced (Froese &
Pauly, 2000). FishBase is a hugely successful online
resource to scientists and laypersons alike, with about
25 millions ‘hits’ and over 2 million visitors per
month.
Initially conceived for the purposes of (single-
species) ﬁsheries management, FishBase now increas-
ingly includes data which link ﬁsh to their ecosystem,
paralleling the move of ﬁsheries science toward
ecosystem-based consideration (Pikitch et al., 2006).
FishBase thus includes much information on the prey
of ﬁshes, including jellyﬁsh, both as reports on
individual food items and as components of detailed
diet composition studies. Also, FishBase incorporates
information on ﬁsh predators, including jellyﬁsh. This
information, extracted from Arai (1987) and Purcell
(1985) and other sources, is summarized in Fig. 1
(top). A total of 124 species of ﬁsh are reported as
feeding occasionally or predominately on jellyﬁsh. Of
these, 11 species appear specialized, and about half
belong to the perciform ﬁshes. The size distribution of
the ﬁsh species feeding on jellyﬁsh is presented in
Fig. 2A. As might be seen, the majority of the ﬁsh
predators fall in the range of 50 to 200 cm maximum
length; also, the number of species feeding on jellyﬁsh
decreases rapidly as the size increases.
Jellyﬁsh in SeaLifeBase
SeaLifeBase (www.sealifebase.org) represents an
attempt to reproduce the success of FishBase for
marine organisms other than ﬁsh, thus including jel-
lyﬁsh. Its coverage of jellyﬁsh relies on a taxonomy
provided by the Catalogue of Life (www.catalogof
life.org), based, in the case of jellyﬁsh, on the work of
Van der Land (2006).
SeaLifeBase has the same basic structure as
FishBase, and thus can similarly be used to summarize
jellyﬁsh predator/prey information, but for animals
other than ﬁsh. This is presented here in Fig. 1
(middle) and Fig. 2B. As might be seen, 34 non-ﬁsh
marine organisms, mainly reptiles, birds, and crusta-
ceans, are reported as feeding, at least occasionally, on
jellyﬁsh. The size distribution of these predators
evidences, similarly to that observed for ﬁsh predators,
a decrease in the number of non-ﬁsh predator species
as the size increases. We do not believe that this
pattern will change as the coverage of SeaLifeBase is
extended.
Jellyﬁsh in (Ecopath) ecosystem models
There are various ways to represent ecosystems
through formal, quantitative models. The model
structure will depend on whether its prime intent is
to summarize and validate one’s knowledge of an
ecosystem, to draw inference on ecosystem proper-
ties, to test hypotheses on various aspects of
ecosystem structure and functioning, or to run various
management scenarios. One of the most commonly
used ecosystem modeling approaches is that incor-
porated in the Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) software
(see www.ecopath.org). Central to this method is the
representation of mass-balance trophic ﬂows between
functional groups for basic parameterization (i.e.,
‘Ecopath models’; Christensen & Pauly, 1992). These
interactions can then be run in ‘Ecosim’ and ‘Eco-
space’ for time-dynamic and spatial simulations,
respectively (Walters et al., 1997, 1998; Pauly et al.,
2000), but this contribution focuses exclusively on
Ecopath and Ecosim.
Owing in part to the ease with which such models
can be constructed based on previously published data,
over 400 EwE models of (mostly marine) ecosystems
have been built and documented in media ranging
from Masters and PhD theses to reports and articles in
the peer-reviewed literature (see www.ecopath.org).
Over 100 of these models (all representing marine
ecosystems, and most developed by ﬁsheries scien-
tists) were examined in the context of a wider study
examining the relationship between the ‘quality’ of
Ecopath models (as deﬁned by the level of detail
included and the types of data for model construction)
and the resilience exhibited in their time-dynamic
behavior (Morissette, 2007). Of these, only 23
explicitly included gelatinous zooplankton (medusae,
Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85 69
123
Fig. 1 Summary of data on the predators and prey of
jellyﬁsh available in three online sources. Top left: Orders to
which the 124 ﬁsh species belong that are reported to prey on
gelatinous organisms (from 181 food items records in
FishBase); Top right: Orders to which the 11 ﬁsh species
belong that are preyed on by gelatinous organisms (data from
FishBase); Middle left: Non-ﬁsh marine organisms (34
species) preying on gelatinous organisms (data from SeaLife-
Base); Middle right: Non-ﬁsh marine organisms (89 species)
consumed by gelatinous organisms (data from SeaLifeBase);
Bottom left: Main predators of gelatinous organisms assem-
bled from 21 (Ecopath) ecosystem models; Bottom right:
Main prey of gelatinous organisms assembled from the same
21 ecosystem models
70 Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85
123
ctenophores, or pelagic tunicates) as a distinct func-
tional group in their food webs.
Consistency among models in how detailed they are
with respect to ‘jellyﬁsh’ is an important consideration
when attempting to evaluate and compare them. We
are mindful that the overwhelming majority of models
do not include a jellyﬁsh compartment, and those that
do tend to collapse all things considered gelatinous
into a single functional ‘jellyﬁsh’ group. With few
exceptions, such as the Chesapeake Bay (Baird &
Ulanowicz, 1989; Walters et al., 2005) and the eastern
Bering Sea (Trites et al., 1999; NRC, 2003) models, a
single jellyﬁsh group poorly represents the true
diversity of taxa and trophic interactions involving
jellyﬁsh. Hopefully, this can be overcome in
the future, in part, by online databases such as
SeaLifeBase.
We suspect the low number of models incorporat-
ing jellyﬁsh, far from reﬂecting the true importance
of jellyﬁsh in marine ecosystems, in fact highlights
the limited knowledge many ﬁsheries scientists or
marine biologists have of jellyﬁsh. However, we also
believe that the crude representation of ‘jellyﬁsh’ as a
single, undifferentiated functional group in most
models that did include gelatinous zooplankton (see
Table 1) may also indicate lack of access to or
appreciation for the key literature on these taxonomic
groups. With this caveat in mind, the main prey and
predators of jellyﬁsh included in these 23 models are
summarized in Fig. 1 (bottom).
The outcome of a modeling effort is only as good
as its initializing parameters. For EwE, there are a
suite of common parameters utilized, sometimes
available from the above databases, most of the time
not. Following is a brief summary of key EwE
parameters and how they, typically, have been
handled for jellyﬁsh in most existing models. Addi-
tionally, we provide brief insight on how these
parameters can be individually measured or estimated
so that future modeling efforts can handle jellyﬁsh
more realistically.
Diet and Trophic Level. Within the EwE construct,
the diet composition of functional groups (typically
species, or groups thereof) deﬁnes the position in the
food web, and ultimately Trophic Level (TL). To
assume that all jellyﬁsh have the same diet and exist
at the same trophic level would be very wrong.
Indeed, their different morphologies, swimming
modes, prey capture, and nematocyst composition
yield widely different diets (Purcell & Mills, 1988;
Costello & Colin, 1995; Peach & Pitt, 2005). Even
within a species, diet may change simply due to an
increase in size (Graham & Kroutil, 2001). Finally, it
is particularly important to consider multiple jellyﬁsh
Fig. 2 Size distribution of (groups of) predators of jellyﬁsh.
Size distribution of ﬁsh feeding on jellyﬁsh, with the smallest
ﬁsh feeding mainly on hydroids, and the largest, the King of
herrings (Regalecus glesne Ascanius, 1772), being documented
by only 4 specimens (data from FishBase) (A); Size distribution
of non-ﬁsh organisms feeding on jellyﬁsh, with the smallest
consisting mainly of planktonic crustaceans feeding on ephyrae,
and the largest consisting of marine turtles (data from
SeaLifeBase) (B)
Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85 71
123
Table 1 Summary of major features of the (Ecopath) ecosystem models used in the analyses of trophic interaction presented here (i.e., Fig. 4); models with an asterisk (*) were
also used for Ecosim runs
Model
name
Ecosystem type
and location
Years Living ?
non-living
groups
Gelatinous
plankton
group (GLP)
GLP
(t  km
-1
)
P/B
(year
-1)
)
Q/B
(year
-1
)
EE Human
impacts
References
*Chesapeake
Bay
Temperate, enclosed
coastal area
1983–1986 33 ? 1 Sea nettle;
TL = 3.31
0.00020 5.00 2.00 0.000 Highly impacted
system
Baird & Ulanowicz
(1989) and
Walters et al. (2005)
*Central North
Paciﬁc
Temperate, open ocean 1990–1998 25 living groups;
9 ﬁshing ﬂeets
‘Jellyﬁsh’;
TL = 3.0
0.00612 0.79 20.00 0.001 Top predators
(tuna) ﬁsheries
After Cox et al.
(2002)
*Eastern Bering
Sea
Temperate shelf and
slope down to 500 m
1955–1960 23 ? 2; 5 ﬁshing
ﬂeets
Mainly
Chrysaeora
melanaster;
TL = 3.16
0.00016 0.88 2.00 0.018 Exploited,
marine
mammals
declined
Trites et al. (1999)
and NRC (2003)
*Georgia Strait Temperate narrow
basin, average depth
156 m
1950s 26 ? 1; 3 ﬁshing
ﬂeets
‘Jellyﬁsh’;
TL = 3.02
0.01861 3.00 12.00 0.211 Heavily
exploited in
the last
90 years
Pauly et al. (1998a,
b)Martell et al.
(2002) and
Walters et al.
(2005)
Hong Kong
waters
Tropical inshore waters 1990s 36 ? 1 detritus
pool; 7 ﬂeets
‘Jellyﬁsh’;
TL =
3.0
0.00578 5.01 25.05 0.257 Stocks
re-building
Cheung et al. (2002)
and Buchary et al.
(2002)
Lancaster Sound Shallow area in the
Canadian Arctic
Late 1980s 31 ? 1 detritus
pool; 1 ﬁshing
ﬂeet
Mertensia ovum;
TL = 2.98
0.01190 8.82 29.41 0.806 Moderate ﬁshing Mohammed (2001)
North Coast of
Central Java
Tropical shelf, shallow
coastal area
Mid 1970s 27 ? 1 detritus
pool; 6 ﬁshing
ﬂeets
Mainly
Scyphozoans;
TL = 3.0
0.00045 5.01 25.05 0.528 Low to moderate
ﬁshing; near
shore
Buchary (1999)
Norwegian-
Barents Sea
1950
Temperate ecosystem;
from intertidal area to
over 3,000 m depth
1950s 30 living groups;
9 ﬁshing ﬂeets
‘Jellyﬁsh’;
TL = 3.17
0.01762 3.00 10.00 0.343 Moderate ﬁshing
activity;
Dommasnes et al.
(2001)
Norwegian-
Barents Sea
1997
Temperate ecosystem;
from intertidal area to
over 3,000 m depth
1997–2000 30 living groups;
9 ﬁshing ﬂeets
‘Jellyﬁsh’;
TL = 3.19
0.02004 3.00 10.00 0.339 High ﬁshing
activity
Dommasnes et al.
(2001)
Southeastern
United States
Tropical, continental
shelf area, from
intertidal to 500 m
depth
1995–1998 41 ? 1 detritus
group; 9 ﬂeets
‘Jellyﬁsh’;
TL =
2.8
0.00028 40.00 80.00 0.950 Intense trawling
activity; highly
ﬁshed
Okey & Pugliese
(2001)
72 Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85
123
Table 1 continued
Model
name
Ecosystem type
and location
Years Living ?
non-living
groups
Gelatinous
plankton
group (GLP)
GLP
(t  km
-1
)
P/B
(year
-1)
)
Q/B
(year
-1
)
EE Human
impacts
References
*Gulf of
Thailand
Tropical shallow coastal
area; 10–50 m depth
range
1970s 39 ? 1 detritus
group; 6 ﬂeets
‘Jellyﬁsh’;
TL = 3.0
0.02198 5.00 20.00 0.000 Moderate ﬁshing FAO/FISHCODE
(2001) and
Walters et al.
(2005)
US Mid Atlantic
Bight
Temperate continental
shelf, from upper
intertidal to 200 m
isobath
1995–1998 55 ? 1; 1 ﬂeet ‘Jellyﬁsh’;
TL = 3.07
0.00018 18.25 80.00 0.900 Highly exploited
area
Okey (2001)
Prince William
Sound
Cold temperate coastal
area in Alaska
1994–1996 46 ? 2; 3 ﬁshing
ﬂeets
‘Jellyﬁsh’;
TL = 2.96
0.01409 8.82 29.41 0.006 Fishing and oil
spill impacts
Okey & Pauly
(1998)
West Florida
Shelf
Tropical shelf area from
intertidal zone to
200 m depth
55 ? 4 non-
living groups;
11 ﬁsheries
Carnivorous
jellyﬁsh;
TL = 3.39
0.00037 40.00 80.00 0.928 Problems of
nutrient
enrichment
Okey et al. (2004)
North Central
Adriatic Sea
Shelf, 3 miles west (or
to 10 m) to 12 miles
from the east coast
1990s 37 ? 3; 5
ﬁsheries
Mainly Pelagia
noctiluca;
TL = 2.66
0.01208 14.60 50.48 0.170 Risk of
ecosystem
overﬁshing
Coll et al. (2007)
South Catalan
Sea
Upper slope from 3
miles of 50 m depth
to 400 m depth.
1994–2000 37 ? 3; 4
ﬁsheries
‘Jellyﬁsh’;
TL = 2.3
0.00659 26.51 56.80 0.017 Large impacts of
ﬁsheries
Coll et al. (2006)
Values in bold were estimated by Ecopath; GLP, gelatinous plankton group; P/B, production/biomass ratio; Q/B, consumption/biomass ratio; EE, ecotrophic efﬁciency (see text)
Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85 73
123
compartments when strong trophic dynamics occur
among gelatinous zooplankton in the so-called jelly
web (Robison, 2004).
Figure 1 (right pie charts) shows that ‘jellyﬁsh’ as
a functional group tend to be carnivorous zooplank-
ton predators, operating at trophic levels between 2.3
and 3.3 (median = 3.0) (Table 1). Most likely, this is
an accurate reﬂection of the TL range based on
available diet information in the published literature
(reviewed by Arai, 1997). However, diet estimated
from jellyﬁsh gut contents biases toward shell or
carapace bearing prey and those prey most common
in the plankton (e.g., copepods in Fig. 1, lower right
pie chart). True energetic ration of jellyﬁsh likely
includes substantial fractions of unrecognizable items
such as detritus and soft microzooplankton (e.g.,
naked ciliates) (Colin et al., 2005) or very large and
rare prey (Pitt et al., 2008).
Biomass (B). Jellyﬁsh are usually not included in
ﬁsheries stock assessments, and so estimates of
biomass are derived either directly from the literature
or from estimates based on occasional by-catch
information. Either way, estimates of jellyﬁsh bio-
mass are confounded by their tendency to be
overdispersed in nature by seasonal blooms or
physical aggregation (Graham et al., 2001). New
technologies such as acoustics are being successfully
applied to jellyﬁsh biomass assessment (Bamstedt
et al., 2003; Colombo et al., 2003; Brierley et al.,
2005; Lyman et al., 2006), and with routine time-
series surveys, these should provide much-needed
information to reﬁne EwE simulations.
Even in existing EwE models, biomass estimates
and related parameters of jellyﬁsh, such as annual
food production relative to biomass (Q/B) and
production per unit of biomass (P/B), vary widely
(Table 1). This is due, to a large extent, to the biomass
of jellyﬁsh not being reported in a fashion consistent
with their high water content. It is conventional to
report biomass of jellyﬁsh as dry or elemental (e.g., C
or N) mass, yet most EwE models are constructed
using wet weight (i.e., tonnes  km
-2
). Thus, even our
own evaluations must be taken with caution until
jellyﬁsh biomass is appropriately, uniformly, and
consistently parameterized in EwE models.
Production (P). Estimates of population production
by jellyﬁsh are rare and usually limited to rapid
individual growth periods during the early phase of a
cohort (e.g., Van der Veer & Oorthuysen, 1985; Olesen
et al., 1994; Uye & Shimauchi, 2005). For most coastal
medusae, the adult stock is derived annually from the
benthic polyp stage, and for ctenophores, seasonal
bloom cycles may rely on successful overwintering of
a small, marginal population (Costello et al., 2006a, b).
In such cases, parameterization of production for EwE
may best be accomplished from population energetics
(i.e., production equals metabolism plus other
expenses such as reproductive output and mucus
production; Arai, 1997). On the other hand, produc-
tion, in EwE models (Table 1), is usually estimated
from biomass and turnover rates (P/B), which is
equivalent, under equilibrium, to total mortality
(Allen, 1971). Palomares & Pauly (2008) suggest that
this approach, which requires estimation of individual
growth parameters, can be applied to jellyﬁsh, in spite
of major differences in life-history characteristics
between jellyﬁsh (medusae and ctenophores) and ﬁsh.
Consumption (Q). Prey consumption rates by
jellyﬁsh can be estimated directly from gut contents
(Purcell, 2003), but this requires knowledge of
digestion times that vary widely by prey type and
temperature (reviewed by Arai, 1997). Consumption
may also be determined in containers or mesocosms
by following losses of the ambient prey, though
container effects are usually high owing to the very
high clearance rates of larger jellyﬁsh (de Lafontaine
& Leggett, 1988; Cowan & Houde, 1992, reviewed
by Arai, 1997). Ultimately, EwE utilizes biomass-
speciﬁc consumption (Q/B) and this parameter varies
widely among models (from 2 to 80 year
-1
in
Table 1). We suspect such differences are again due
to inconsistencies in reporting jellyﬁsh biomass as
dry or wet mass.
Ecotrophic efﬁciency (EE). This parameter of EwE
expresses the fraction of the production of jellyﬁsh
that ultimately passes on to their predators (or a
ﬁshery). Obviously, the value of EE one chooses will
depend on one’s knowledge of the organisms that
prey on jellyﬁsh. As seen in Fig. 1 (pie charts on the
left), predation on jellyﬁsh by non-jellyﬁsh consum-
ers occurs (mostly by ﬁsh, but also sea turtles,
seabird, and a few invertebrates). Indeed, some
organisms are obligate jellyﬁsh predators (e.g., ocean
sunﬁsh Mola mola (Linnaeus, 1758) and leatherback
turtles Dermochelys coriacea Vandelli, 1761). How-
ever, very little is known about predation rates on
jellyﬁsh. Thus EE is often set at or near zero
(Table 1), assuming jellyﬁsh are largely trophic ‘dead
74 Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85
123
ends.’ This may be a good approximation in many
ecosystems, and seasonal declines in jellyﬁsh are
often noted to be coincident with senescence (e.g.,
Yamamoto et al., 2008; personal observation (WG)).
In a few ecosystems (e.g., the Central North Paciﬁc),
the top predators rely on throughput of energy from
jellyﬁsh to higher trophic level predators in which
case EE would have to be set near to 1 (Table 1).
Finally, we should mention that the EE is calculated
by Ecopath for each functional group for which B,
P/B, Q/B, and the diet composition are known.
Mutual impacts through food webs
In order to further investigate the role of jellyﬁsh in
ecosystem models, we selected 5 high quality EwE
models, i.e., with highly disaggregated functional
groups (Pinnegar et al., 2005), parameterized mostly
on the basis of accurate, locally sampled data
(Morissette, 2007). These models, each representative
of different regions also included EwE simulations
that had been ﬁtted to time-series data of the
abundance of several of their functional groups
(although none was ﬁtted with jellyﬁsh time-series
data), which precludes model parameterizations from
generating pathological behaviors, e.g., system self-
simpliﬁcation (Christensen & Walters, 2004). All ﬁve
of these models (highlighted in Table 1) were
rechecked by the persons who created them, and they
all ﬁtted the available time-series reasonably well.
The mutual impact matrix within Ecopath was
used to compare the ‘with/without’ impact of preda-
tion by jellyﬁsh on the ecosystem as a whole (Fig. 3).
This method allows the estimation of the relative
direct or indirect impact of a (small) change in the
biomass of one group on all other functional groups
in the ecosystem, given the assumption that their diet
composition remains constant (Ulanowicz & Puccia,
1990; Christensen & Pauly, 1992). As can be seen
from Fig. 3 (upper panel), jellyﬁsh are mainly
impacted by plankton groups (phytoplankton and
zooplankton) which are their direct and indirect prey.
Figure 3 represents an example for the Gulf of
Thailand, but this was true for all studied ecosystems.
The relatively few reported predators (both diver-
sity and number) of jellyﬁsh in ecosystems do not
generate an important overall impact on the group.
This strongly suggests that jellyﬁsh species are
subject to bottom–up control from their forage base
rather than top–down controls from predators.
One exception supporting strong top–down control
Fig. 3 Graphic
representation of a partial
output of the mutual impact
matrix of Ecopath, here for
the Gulf of Thailand
ecosystem model
documented in Table 1, and
used to evaluate the impacts
on jellyﬁsh of a small
increase of biomass of the
other groups in the system
(above), and the impact on
the other groups in the
system of a small increase
of jellyﬁsh in the same
system (below)
Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85 75
123
involves predation by one functional group of
jellyﬁsh on another, which of course generates an
apparent negative impact of jellyﬁsh on itself. On the
other hand, most species of the ecosystem are
indirectly impacted by jellyﬁsh (Fig. 3, lower panel).
A positive impact of jellyﬁsh predation is seen on
phytoplankton (because jellyﬁsh consume herbivo-
rous zooplankton), and on different ﬁsh species (for
example, Ariidae, rays, shellﬁsh, sergestid shrimp in
the Gulf of Thailand) that share the characteristics of
being benthivorous species. A negative impact of
jellyﬁsh is also seen on different zooplankton groups
(their main prey), and indirectly on ﬁsh such as
Indian mackerels (Rastrelliger spp.), Spanish mack-
erel (Scomberomorus spp.), false trevally Lactarius
lactarius (Bloch & Schneider, 1801), or small
pelagics species that are mainly zooplanktivorous.
Jellyﬁsh keystoneness
The analysis of the role of jellyﬁsh within ecosystems
can be broadened by asking whether they can be
labeled as keystone species/group. Keystone species,
ﬁrst identiﬁed by Paine (1969), are deﬁned by Power
et al. (1996) as species that are important to the
structure and productivity of the ecosystem in which
they occur, but without being abundant. Using the
most famous ‘keystone’ example, in kelp forest
ecosystems along the Paciﬁc coast of North America,
despite the kelp’s structures and the fact that it fuels
the entire system, it is the relatively rare sea otter who
plays that role, by keeping sea urchins in check, thus
preventing the kelp from being grazed and being
turned into an urchin ‘barren’ (Estes & Palmisano,
1974; Power et al., 1996).
One problem with this concept is that assessing
whether a given species performs the role of a
keystone through ﬁeld experiments is difﬁcult at best
(Paine, 1992), and impossible in the majority of
cases. In response to this, Libralato et al. (2006)
developed a modeling approach to investigate this
concept based on the mutual impact matrix of EwE
(see above). Therein the ‘keystoneness’ of a species
in its ecosystem (or more precisely of a functional
group representing that species in an ecosystem
model) is computed from the ratio of the sum of its
direct and indirect impacts on all other groups in the
system over its biomass (Libralato et al., 2006).
In this sense, the concept of jellyﬁsh keystoneness
may be an appropriate approach to understand why
certain ecosystems appear to be more vulnerable to
jellyﬁsh population increases.
Sixteen ecosystem models were used for this
analysis, constituting a subset of the original 42
models included in Libralato et al. (2006) that
included jellyﬁsh (see Table 1 for a brief description).
The habitat types they cover range from semi-
enclosed waters in the case of Chesapeake Bay (Baird
& Ulanowicz, 1989) and Prince William Sound (Okey
& Pauly, 1998) to large areas of the open ocean such
as the Central North Paciﬁc (Cox et al., 2002). The
ecosystems represented are also subject to different
degrees of human impacts, ranging from heavily
ﬁshed, e.g., the Hong Kong area (Cheung et al.,
2002), to exploitation targeting mainly top predators,
e.g., the Central North Paciﬁc (Cox et al., 2002). All
are well described, and include a minimum of 24
functional groups. Jellyﬁsh represent a highly variable
fraction of the total biomass of these ecosystems,
ranging from approximately 1/50 in the Norwegian-
Barents Sea (Trites et al., 1999) to less than 1/5,000 in
the Eastern Bering Sea (Dommasnes et al., 2001).
Overall, the results show that jellyﬁshes’ key-
stoneness ranges widely (Fig. 4), being highest in
three ecosystem models, i.e., Lancaster Sound,
Chesapeake Bay, and the Central North Paciﬁc.
Thus, according to the interpretation proposed in
Libralato et al. (
2006), jellyﬁshes may be considered
Fig. 4 Keystoneness of jellyﬁsh in 16 ecosystem models
documented in Table 1 against their relative overall effect (see
text for interpretation)
76 Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85
123
keystone groups in these ecosystems. The Central
North Paciﬁc may be exceptional since the high
overall effect of jellyﬁsh is due to its very large
positive impact on sea turtles (leatherback and
loggerhead). [In this model, sea turtles are the only
predator of jellyﬁsh, and jellyﬁsh constitute 100% of
leatherbacks’ diet (loggerheads also feeds on epipe-
lagic ﬁsh; Cox et al., 2002).] This exclusive
predator–prey relationship makes the jellyﬁsh-sea
turtle coupling extremely strong, thus explaining the
high overall effect. Given the very low turnover rates
of sea turtles, this degree of coupling is dubious, yet
consistent with the very long-term (equilibrium)
solution that is at the base of the methodology
proposed by Libralato et al. (2006).
Perhaps better examples of realistically high
keystoneness can be seen in the Lancaster Sound
and Chesapeake Bay models. In Lancaster Sound, the
large effects are attributable to the very high negative
impact that one particular species, the ctenophore
Mertensia ovum (Fabricius, 1780), has on its main
prey, i.e., omnivorous and herbivorous zooplankton,
ice amphipods, and chaetognaths (Mohammed,
2001). In Chesapeake Bay, overall keystoneness is
mainly due to direct positive effects small changes in
‘jellyﬁsh’ (sea nettle) biomass have on its main
predators (ﬁsh larvae, blue herring, bay anchovy,
menhaden, and shad) and to indirect effects on
competitors (zooplankton and ctenophores). In this
ecosystem, cascading effects, wherein a predator
suppresses a prey, whose own prey then increases,
etc., appear to be particularly strong. The positive
indirect effects of the sea nettle’s predators (blueﬁsh,
weak ﬁsh, summer ﬂounder, and striped bass) con-
tribute substantially to the sea nettle’s overall effect
on the food web.
In contrast, jellyﬁsh have low keystoneness in the
Eastern Bering and South Catalan Seas, and have
negligible values of keystoneness in the remaining
ecosystems (Fig. 4). Between the Eastern Bering Sea
and the South Catalan Sea models, the relative
abundances of jellyﬁsh differ by two orders of
magnitude. However, it is still their low overall
effect on other groups, not their abundance, which
explains the very low keystoneness of jellyﬁsh in
these models. In both examples, jellyﬁsh are minor
consumers of zooplankton, while cannibalism is the
only (Eastern Bering Sea) or the main (South Catalan
Sea) form of predation on jellyﬁsh. Such feeding
interactions do not count when keystoneness is
calculated (see Libralato et al., 2006).
There are also cases where jellyﬁsh have interme-
diate keystoneness values. Thus, for example, in
Hong Kong, jellyﬁsh prey on the zooplankton, but are
themselves preyed upon by many pelagic and
demersal ﬁshes (Cheung et al., 2002). Although this
creates many direct and indirect impacts, they are
relatively small, thus yielding a small overall effect.
In summary, we can conclude that very different
structural features might lead to jellyﬁsh assuming a
keystone role. One of the obvious patterns emerging
from Fig. 4 is the physical size of the ecosystem with
smaller semi-enclosed systems (Chesapeake Bay and
Lancaster Sound) being most sensitive to ‘keystone’
jellyﬁsh and larger, more open ones being less
sensitive (with the exceptional relationship between
turtles and jellyﬁsh in the Central North Paciﬁc
excluded). Perhaps this is validation of the expected
complexity of multichannel food webs in (larger)
open systems being less structured and thus less
sensitive to trophic cascades (Polis & Strong, 1996).
In addition, we suggest three typical ecological
conﬁgurations where jellyﬁsh keystoneness increases:
• jellyﬁsh are a high-impact predator with a rela-
tively low biomass (Lancaster Sound);
• are a prey of signiﬁcant importance to some
predators in an ecosystem characterized by large
indirect effects (Chesapeake Bay); and
• are a part of a mutually exclusive prey–predator
pair (Central North Paciﬁc).
Time-dynamic simulations
Time-dynamic simulations (using the Ecosim com-
ponent of EwE) were run to complete our preliminary
coverage of the behavior of jellyﬁsh in trophic
ecosystem models. Speciﬁcally, we attempted to
identify ﬁshing patterns (on ﬁnﬁshes and inverte-
brates other than jellyﬁsh) that would generate
marked increases in jellyﬁsh biomass within the
ecosystem. The simulations were performed on the
ﬁve representative models identiﬁed under the anal-
ysis of ‘Mutual impacts through food webs’ section,
and details of how the models were parameterized are
provided in Table 1. Only results from four of these
models (Gulf of Thailand, Central North Paciﬁc,
Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85 77
123
Chesapeake Bay, and Eastern Bering Sea) are
presented as they best illustrate the range of the
‘keystoneness’ aspect discussed earlier as well as the
ecological differences (notably the presence or
absence of predators on jellyﬁsh).
All of the models were forced, in a similar manner,
by a linear increase in zooplankton production over
time (i.e., bottom–up control). In the case of the Gulf
of Thailand and Central North Paciﬁc models, the
models were also forced by an artiﬁcially enhanced
mortality on the predators of jellyﬁsh (i.e., top–down
controls). The Chesapeake Bay and Eastern Bering
Sea models have no explicit jellyﬁsh predators
identiﬁed for those models.
In general, the simulations indicate that strong
bottom–up control by increased prey resources may
be more important than the top–down controls
placed on jellyﬁsh by their predators (Figs. 5–7).
In all cases, jellyﬁsh biomass increased over time
with increased zooplankton production. Predator
mortality simulated by increased ﬁshing mortality
on small pelagic ﬁshes in the Gulf of Thailand and
by increased sea turtle mortality in the Central
North Paciﬁc did not yield marked increases in
jellyﬁsh biomass. However, this is all very pre-
liminary because, as mentioned earlier, predation on
jellyﬁsh by vertebrates and other invertebrates is
poorly understood (Arai, 2005; Purcell & Arai,
2001) and is likely far underestimated in these
modeled systems.
Without explicit predators of jellyﬁsh in the
Chesapeake Bay and Eastern Bering Sea models, the
linearly increasing function of zooplankton represent-
ing bottom–up forcing (possibly via eutrophication)
causes interesting patterns that seem to reﬂect the
‘keystoneness’ of jellyﬁsh. As discussed earlier, the
Chesapeake Bay model is highly structured with
respect to jellyﬁsh and shows a strong coupling
between zooplankton prey and jellyﬁsh as seen in the
nearly linear relationship in Fig. 7 (top panel). In
contrast, the Eastern Bering Sea model, forced in a
similar manner, shows large sinusoidal variations
(Fig. 7, bottom panel). The large variations are likely
due to the reduced structure in the larger Eastern
Bering Sea system (i.e., more explicit redundancies in
trophic pathways involving jellyﬁsh). This is an
interesting, albeit preliminary, pattern and could be
useful to further identify ecosystem attributes (e.g.,
physical size, food web complexity, etc.) that make
them more vulnerable to jellyﬁsh increases.
Likewise, the presence of predators on jellyﬁsh
may be important in regulating jellyﬁsh biomass
increases in some cases. While the Central North
Paciﬁc may be unrealistic in its parameterization of
trophic ﬂows involving jellyﬁsh, the presence of
jellyﬁsh-eating turtles certainly is a highly coupled
Fig. 5 Example of simulated biomass trends for jellyﬁsh and their main prey (above) and jellyﬁsh and their main predator (below) in
the Gulf of Thailand
78 Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85
123
relationship which should be explored in more detail.
The Gulf of Thailand model may be the most
informative for exploring coupled top–down and
bottom–up effects, and could explain how multiple
pressures such as combined effects of ﬁshing and
eutrophication interact to yield large increases in
jellyﬁsh biomass. The obvious next step for such
models is to further investigate whether a positive
feedback loop exists that further depresses jellyﬁsh-
consuming ﬁsh through increased ichthyoplankton
mortality due to increased jellyﬁsh.
Fishing down marine food webs and jellyﬁsh
outbreaks
The phenomenon wherein ﬁsheries increasingly tar-
get smaller ﬁsh lower down in the food web, now
Fig. 6 Simulation of a jellyﬁsh bloom with ecosystem models: an example for the Central North Paciﬁc (see text)
Fig. 7 Simulating the effect of increasing zooplankton in the Chesapeake (top) and Eastern Bering Sea (bottom) ecosystem models.
Note the increase of jellyﬁsh, shown in the insets in relation to the biomass of their prey (see text)
Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85 79
123
commonly referred to as ‘ﬁshing down marine food
webs’ (FD; Pauly et al., 1998a, b), is now well
documented from a variety of countries and eco-
system types (Pauly & Palomares, 2005). This is one
reason why the Convention on Biological Diversity
selected the mean trophic level of ﬁsheries catch,
renamed ‘Marine Trophic Index,’ as one of eight
indicators for ‘immediate testing’ by its [180 mem-
ber countries (Pauly & Watson, 2005).
It is, however, the ecological changes in food web
conﬁguration that accompany FD which are relevant
here. These may indeed provide a framework within
which changes in marine ecosystems brought about
by ﬁshing can be assessed, particularly with respect
to their possible impacts on jellyﬁsh populations and
their dynamics. Essentially, FD consists of the
gradual loss of large organisms, species diversity,
and structural diversity, i.e., the replacement of
recently evolved, derived groups (marine mammals,
bony ﬁshes) by more primitive groups (invertebrates,
notably jellyﬁshes, and bacteria). This is best seen
when splitting the FD process into three phases, i.e.,
1: ‘pristine’ or ‘past’; 2: ‘present’ or ‘exploited’; and
3: ‘future’ or ‘fully degraded’, corresponding to the
three phases of degradation suggested by Jackson
et al. (2001) and Pandolﬁ et al. (2005). We can then
characterize each phase by (i) the main features of the
ﬁshes and other nektonic organisms and (ii) the
pelagic–benthic coupling and its effect on processes
in the water column (see also Fig. 8).
The ﬁrst ‘pristine’ phase prevailed before humans
had a chance to strongly impact ocean ecosystems
(Jackson et al., 2001). Few parts of the oceans,
notably outlying areas of the North and South Paciﬁc,
may still be labeled as pristine. For most of the
world’s oceans, estimates of pristine abundances
must be recovered based on historical accounts and
anecdotes (Sa
´
enz-Arroyo et al., 2005; Palomares
et al., 2006), or inferred from archeological data
(Jackson et al., 2001, Roberts, 2007).
Invariably, a pristine state is characterized by
numerous marine mammals and large ﬁsh as top
predators, the latter group with biomasses often
exceeding their present abundance by one or two
orders of magnitude. Elevated biomass of top preda-
tors also implies an abundance of small prey ﬁshes
and invertebrates, though not necessarily of those
opportunistic groups (shrimps, squids) that now
support increasingly valuable ﬁsheries.
In the pristine environment, benthic life is dom-
inated by an abundant structure-forming and sessile
fauna. It is composed of ﬁlter feeders and deposit
feeders, which suppress phytoplankton and detritus
biomass and prevent re-suspension of sediments. As a
result, the water column tends to be free of suspended
particles and of nutrients leaching from them, i.e.,
oligotrophic. It is thus hypothesized that jellyﬁsh
were less abundant, and perhaps severe bloom cycles
less frequent than now, because:
• The pelagic stage of jellyﬁsh (the medusoids) had
less food, and far more predators (e.g., leather-
back sea turtles) than now; and
• Their sessile polyp stages were exposed to far
more benthic predators, and had to contend with
far more benthic zooplankton-feeding competitors
than now, because of the intact benthic commu-
nities then prevailing.
The second ‘exploited’ phase is where we cur-
rently are. It is best characterized by declines, notably
in the biomasses of large ﬁshes, sizes and diversity of
ﬁshes in ﬁsheries catches, trophic levels of the same
(and hence the FD phenomenon), and benthos.
Initially, these declines are compensated for by
cascade effects (e.g., Myers et al., 2007), manifest
in the emergence of new ﬁsheries for squids and other
invertebrates, but which eventually decline as well.
Benthic life is also modiﬁed: biogenic structures,
built over centuries by ﬁlter and detritus feeders, are
Fig. 8 Fishing down marine food webs: the three stages
(Pristine, Present, Future) offer increasingly better conditions
for jellyﬁsh (see text)
80 Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85
123
increasingly destroyed by bottom trawling, and
replaced by small errant benthic animals (Hall,
1999), a situation advantageous for the benthic
(polyp) stages of jellyﬁshes. The water column
becomes progressively eutrophied, owing to the
increasing scarcity of animals and structures that
were cropping phytoplankton and consuming marine
snow (detritus), which is now being re-suspended by
storms and by trawling itself. For jellyﬁsh, this
generally implies improved conditions (Arai 2001).
However, jellyﬁsh outbreaks may still require to be
triggered by exceptional abiotic conditions (Purcell,
2005).
The third ‘fully degraded’ phase follows on the
continuation of present trends—although in some
places, e.g., estuaries such as the Chesapeake Bay,
many of the features associated with this third stage
have already developed. In the Chesapeake Bay,
ﬁshing not only has eliminated virtually all animals
above the size of striped bass, the current top predator,
but also more importantly has eliminated the key ﬁlter
feeders, both benthic (oyster; Jackson et al., 2001) and
pelagic (menhaden; Franklin, 2007). Oysters, which,
until 150 years ago, formed giant reefs, are reported as
having been capable of ﬁltering the water of Chesa-
peake Bay in 3 days (Jackson et al., 2001). Their
absence (again, a result of ﬁshing), compounded by
the scarcity of menhaden, is the ultimate reason why
pollution from efﬂuents can now have such strong
effects, and why harmful algae bloom occur. This also
applies to other water bodies, estuarine or not, which
are rendered less resilient by ﬁshing, and easier for
invasive species to overwhelm.
The biological endpoint of ecosystem degradation
is the ‘dead zone.’ It is a zone free of oxygen and
multicellular life as a result of excess nutrients, with
bacteria instead of benthic animals, processing the
resulting abundance of marine snow and other
detritus. Such dead zones occur throughout the world,
from the northern Gulf of Mexico (Rabalais et al.,
2002) to the Benguela system off southwest Africa
(Bakun & Weeks, 2004), and their number is growing
rapidly (Dybas, 2005).
Jellyﬁsh appear to have a competitive advantage
over ﬁsh in hypoxic conditions (Sagasti et al., 2001).
Such adaptation can lead to the dominance of
jellyﬁsh in a highly stressed ecosystem, as reported
for example by Lyman et al. (2006) for the Benguela
upwelling ecosystem.
Conclusions
Jellyﬁsh clearly play an extremely important role in
the processing of energy in ﬁsheries-based ecosys-
tems. Short of conducting large-scale manipulations
of marine ecosystems, the best alternative is ecosys-
tem modeling. In this paper, we have documented
that representation of jellyﬁsh in existing EwE
models is generally poor in terms of both their
simple inclusion in models and their parameterization
when they are included. Appropriate parameteriza-
tion is critical, and we have shown in Table 1 that the
parameters of jellyﬁsh in EwE (i.e., their Q/B, P/B,
TL and) are unacceptably variable. Some of this may
be due to inappropriate use of wet biomass-speciﬁc
measures, which are highly biased for gelatinous
animals. We encourage future modeling studies to not
only include jellyﬁsh, but also to carefully consider
how the models handle their unique biological nature.
Despite these difﬁculties, we see interesting and
potentially important patterns among various EwE
models that have included jellyﬁsh. Speciﬁcally, we
note the ‘keystoneness’ values of jellyﬁsh appear to
increase as the size of the ecosystem decreases. This
is but one example of how ecosystem models can be
used to develop and test hypotheses on the functional
role of jellyﬁsh in marine ecosystems.
We are now also able to test speciﬁc hypotheses
derived from ‘Fishing Down Marine Food Webs,’ an
explanation growing in popularity for explaining
jellyﬁsh biomass increase in ﬁsheries-based ecosys-
tems. The three phases of ﬁshing down, pristine,
exploited, and fully degraded, offering increasingly
favorable conditions for jellyﬁsh, are schematic, and
they could be further subdivided, and/or deﬁned more
rigorously. Still, even in their present, preliminary
form, they provide a coherent framework for many of
the changes observed in ocean ecosystems, including
those that favor jellyﬁsh blooms or outbreaks.
One way to test this framework, and the hypoth-
eses it includes, would be to re-express all models in
Table 1 in dry weight or energy units (they currently
use wet weight as currency), and rerun all analyses.
This would help overcome the likelihood that the
high water content of jellyﬁsh has been ignored in
some ecosystem models, i.e., that ‘biomass’ consists
overwhelmingly of water. Also, the often assumed
diets of jellyﬁsh would have to be veriﬁed, as they
play, in trophic models, as crucial a role as they play
Hydrobiologia (2009) 616:67–85 81
123
in real ecosystems. Better information on the diet of
jellyﬁsh will likely bring to evidence the need for
enhancing the resolution currently used for describing
these organisms in food web models. Description of
jellyﬁsh with a set of appropriate functional groups
will certainly help in better understanding their role
in food webs and their effects on ecosystems. Once
these precautions are taken, however, it should be
possible to integrate jellyﬁsh, in spite of their strange
biology, into the mainstream of marine biology and
ﬁsheries research.